<!-- page 1 -->
1
DeblurSplat: SfM-free 3D Gaussian Splatting with Event Camera
for Robust Deblurring
Pengteng Li, Yunfan Lu, Pinhao Song, Weiyu Guo, Huizai Yao, F. Richard Yu, Fellow, IEEE, and Hui
Xiong, Fellow, IEEE
.
Abstract—In this paper, we propose the first Structure-from-
Motion (SfM)-free deblurring 3D Gaussian Splatting method
via event camera, dubbed DeblurSplat. We address the motion-
deblurring problem in two ways. First, we leverage the pretrained
capability of the dense stereo module (DUSt3R) to directly
obtain accurate initial point clouds from blurred images. Without
calculating camera poses as an intermediate result, we avoid
the cumulative errors transfer from inaccurate camera poses
to the initial point clouds’ positions. Second, we introduce the
event stream into the deblur pipeline for its high sensitivity
to dynamic change. By decoding the latent sharp images from
the event stream and blurred images, we can provide a fine-
grained supervision signal for scene reconstruction optimization.
Extensive experiments across a range of scenes demonstrate that
DeblurSplat not only excels in generating high-fidelity novel views
but also achieves significant rendering efficiency compared to the
SOTAs in deblur 3D-GS.
I. INTRODUCTION
Scene reconstruction and novel-view synthesis (NVS) from
2D image collections remain fundamental yet challenging
problems in computer vision and computer graphics. While
point-based representations, such as 3D-GS [1] and NeRF [2],
have achieved impressive results in generating high-fidelity
novel views, they typically assume high-quality inputs cap-
tured in ideal conditions. Unfortunately, real-world captures
often contain motion blur [3] due to low-light or long-exposure
settings, leading to inaccurate geometry estimation across
multiple views. As a result, the performance of both NeRF
and 3D-GS deteriorates significantly in blurred scenarios.
To address this issue, researchers have explored deblur-
based NeRF and 3D-GS approaches that explicitly model the
latent physical blur process [6], [7], [8], [3]. Recently, the
imaging characteristics of event cameras—such as no motion
blur and high dynamic range—have made them particularly
attractive for deblurring tasks [9], [10], [11], [12], [13], [14],
[15]. By leveraging the physical imaging process [16], event-
based methods can recover clearer scene details, outperform-
ing purely RGB-based pipelines.
Even when event cameras are employed, the overall recon-
struction quality is often constrained by the inaccurate initial-
ization provided by traditional Structure-from-Motion (SfM)
pipelines (e.g., COLMAP). Motion-blurred images tend to
Corresponding authors: Hui Xiong.
Pengteng Li, Yunfan Lu, Weiyu Guo, Huizai Yao and Hui Xiong are with
the Thust of the Artificial Intelligence, The Hong Kong University of Science
and Technology (Guangzhou), Guangzhou 511453, China (email: {pli807,
ylu066, wguo395, hyao032}@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn), xionghui@ust.hk)
Pinhao Song is with the KU Leuven (email: pinhao.song@kuleuven.be).
F. Richard Yu is with Carleton University (e-mail: richard.yu@carleton.ca).
(a) Previous Deblur Works: Need Pose and Coarse Initialization.
COLMAP
Blur Images
Initial Pose
GT Pose
Estimated Pose
❌
Coarse Point Cloud
(b) Our Deblur Work: Pose-free and Better Initialization.
✅
1
2
!
Blur Images
Dense  Stereo
Better Point Cloud
Initial Pose
Choice
Event Stream
1
2
!
Confidence 
Balanced Sampling
Fig. 1. Illustration of differences between our work and previous works for
deblur reconstruction. (a) Most previous works directly estimate camera poses
and point clouds by COLMAP [4], leading to coarse point clouds initialization
and poses due to the blur geometry uncertainty. (b) Our work mainly utilize
sufficient semantic prior from the dense stereo module (DUSt3R [5]) to
initialize better point clouds and camera poses, while leverages event streams
to guarantee the overall optimization.
smear out edges and flatten texture details, creating extensive
regions of semantically similar pixels [12], [8]. This confuses
the feature detection and matching process, yielding fewer
valid correspondences and a higher likelihood of mismatches.
As a result, camera pose estimation is inaccurate, leading
to noticeable misalignment across multiple views. Since 3D-
GS and NeRF frameworks rely heavily on precise multi-view
alignment to fuse geometry and appearance, these pose errors
propagate into the final reconstruction, manifesting as distorted
geometry, incomplete surfaces, and artifacts in the rendered
views. Consequently, the initial point clouds generated by
COLMAP are often sparse or inaccurately positioned, further
undermining the performance of the entire deblurring pipeline.
Moreover, using SfM to estimate blur scenes results with
several images in longer training time consuming and is prone
to failure, which we conduct relative experiments as shown in
Figure 4.
Recently, SfM-free novel-view synthesis approaches [17],
[5], [18], [19], [20] have emerged, showing potential to
circumvent SfM pitfalls by directly estimating scene geometry
in an end-to-end manner. In particular, DUSt3R [5] employs
a dense stereo module pretrained on large-scale datasets,
demonstrating greater robustness in producing point clouds
arXiv:2509.18898v1  [cs.CV]  23 Sep 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
2
Conf.
Freq. (1e6)
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
(b) The Dist. of  Conf. (Blur)
Conf.
Freq. (1e6)
0.75
0.80
0.85
0.90
0.95
1.00
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
(c) The Dist. of  Conf. (Sharp)
26.4
26.2
26.0
25.8
25.6
25.4
25.2
25.0
PSNR
(d) The PSNR of NVS in different ! proportion sampling.
0.1 0.2 0.3 0.4 0.5 0.6 0.7 0.8 0.9
Points with low confidence 
still contribute.
(a) Initial Point cloud and Conf. Map (Blur)
0.9 < % ≤1
0.8 < % ≤0.9
0.7 < % ≤0.8
* 
Fig. 2. Empirical study of initial point clouds generated from blur images by DUSt3R. Here, “Freq.” denotes frequency, “Dist.” denotes distribution, “Conf.”
denotes confidence. (d) means that we sample the points that have a confidence level greater than their corresponding quantile threshold of 1 −β, which we
sample a proportion of the point cloud equal to β in total.
even under challenging conditions. This motivates us to adopt
DUSt3R for more accurate and robust initialization when
dealing with motion-blurred imagery.
Building on these insights, we propose DeblurSplat, the
first SfM-free motion-deblurring framework for 3D-GS that
integrates event-camera priors with DUSt3R’s robust initial-
ization (see Figure 1). To sufficiently excavate the information
from DUSt3R, we introduce a Confidence Balanced Sampling
strategy, which considers the confidences of points as well as
maintains a basic spatial information of the scene. Further-
more, to tackle residual defects caused by motion-blur, we
propose Progressive Alignment, which exploits event-camera
information [10], [11], [12], [13], [14], [15] to iteratively refine
motion-blurry pixels by aligning them with clearer semantics
derived from event streams. To further evaluate the method
performance in more complicated motion-blur degrees, we
propose 7 complex scenes crafted from Blender which consist
of difference texture, diverse lightning condition and multiple
objects compared to normal datasets [6]. Finally, we also
design different motion-blur degrees real-world datasets by
adjusting the exposure time for comprehensive evaluation.
Finally, our contributions can be listed as follows:
• We propose DeblurSplat, a SfM-free 3D-GS framework
designed for robust deblurring, which effectively inte-
grates the extensive prior knowledge from DUSt3R and
the high dynamic range information provided by event
cameras. As we known, this work constitutes the first
attempt to leverage a dense stereo module to tackle the
challenge of motion-deblurring in 3D reconstruction.
• We propose an initial point clouds sampling strategy
named Confidence Balanced Sampling that leverages
DUSt3R’s confidence estimates while preserving neces-
sary spatial coverage.
• We propose Progressive Alignment to combine the cues
from event stream for an accurate scene reconstruction.
By estimating the latent sharp images and latent camera
poses, we provide a fine-grained guidance for scene
reconstruction optimization.
• Extensive experiments on diverse scenes demonstrate
that DeblurSplat achieves SOTA results and outperforms
motion-deblur reconstruction counterparts significantly.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Motion-Deblur Reconstruction
Motion blur is a frequent occurrence in real-world imag-
ing scenarios and poses a significant challenge for accurate
3D scene reconstruction. Efforts to address this issue have
progressed in both the RGB domain and the event-based
domain. In the RGB domain, early methods [6], [7] learned
a blur formation kernel to approximate the image blurring
process, while subsequent approaches [3], [8] integrated blur
modeling with bundle adjustment for deblurring. Neverthe-
less, even when synthesizing motion blur, recovering precise
texture details across multiple views remains non-trivial. By
contrast, event cameras provide asynchronous event streams
with several notable advantages, including a high dynamic
range (>120dB vs. 60dB in conventional sensors) [9], which
has attracted considerable attention for deblurring. Early event-
based methods [21], [22], [23], [24] convert event streams
into intensity images or temporal differences, using these
signals to guide novel-view synthesis. Later works [25], [26],
[27] incorporate additional event-imaging factors, such as
event-motion. More recently, approaches [10], [28], [14], [29]
integrate motion-blur modeling [3], [8] with event-camera
decoupling [12], [30] to jointly optimize latent poses.
Despite these advances, most event-based deblurring meth-
ods still rely on SfM (e.g., COLMAP) for camera pose esti-
mation, thereby obtaining initial point clouds. Under blurred
conditions, however, such pose estimates are prone to inac-
curacies, leading to cumulative errors in the resulting point
clouds. Furthermore, the latent-pose optimization process can
be computationally expensive; for instance, works like [10],
[28], [12] must first estimate camera poses, which adds sig-
nificant overhead. In contrast, our proposed method leverages
the powerful, pretrained DUSt3R to directly generate initial
point clouds, eliminating the need for pose estimation from
blurred inputs. By effectively combining these point clouds
with event information, our framework achieves more accurate
and efficient 3D scene reconstruction under motion blur.
B. SfM-free Novel-view Synthesis
Recent advances in novel-view synthesis from uncalibrated
images have been greatly facilitated by progress in Multi-
view Stereo (MVS) methods [31], [20], [19], [32]. Cutting-
edge MVS approaches [5], [33], [20] can directly estimate the
geometry of visible surfaces without requiring explicit camera
parameters. For instance, PF3plat [34] aligns 3D Gaussians
coarsely by leveraging pre-trained models for monocular depth
estimation and visual correspondence. Meanwhile, Splatt3R
[35] and NopoSplat [36] employ DUSt3R [5] and MASt3R
[33] to predict point maps as proxy geometry, subsequently

<!-- page 3 -->
3
Dense Stereo 
…
Τ!
Τ"
Camera Poses
Confidence
Point Cloud
n
2
1
…
Latent Sharp Images "#($$)
(a) Balanced Sampling
Projection
Differentiable
Rasterization
0
1
Confidence
Fine-grained Point Cloud
Adaptive
Density Control
Gaussian Primitives
(b) Progressive Alignment
Exposure Time: 
$$
$!
&'# = 1
* + ",%
#
&
%'!
ℒ(
&#
.("%
# )
ℒ)
.(",%
# )
Gradient Flow
Forward Flow
Event Camera
/
2
…
1
Fig. 3.
Illustration of our proposed DeblurSplat. We first input the blur images into the dense stereo module (DUSt3R [5]) for getting estimated point
clouds and corresponding confidence. Then, we propose the Confidence Balanced Sampling to extract high-quality point clouds by conforming the original
points distribution. In the mean time, we utilize the event stream to decouple blur images into multiple latent sharp images by EDI [16]. Finally, we perform
Progressive Alignment to recover the clear semantics in coarse to fine manner.
learning 3D Gaussians for sparse-view reconstruction. Al-
though these methods primarily explore generalization in
sparse-view 3D reconstruction, our work is the first to fully
exploit dense stereo techniques for deblurring reconstruction
and novel-view synthesis, thus extending their applicability to
challenging blur scenarios.
III. METHOD
The proposed DeblurSplat pipeline is illustrated in Figure
3. The following two subsections detail its main components.
In Subsection III-A, we generate dense point clouds with
associated confidence values via DUSt3R, then analyze various
sampling strategies to address potential issues. Inspired by the
analysis, we introduce Confidence Balanced Sampling, which
employs confidence scores to exclude unreliable points while
preserving essential spatial coverage. In Subsection III-B, we
utilize event streams to recover both latent sharp images and
latent motion poses, providing fine-grained optimization cues
for scene reconstruction.
A. Sampling Initial Point Clouds from DUSt3R
Motivation. As outlined in Section I, DUSt3R generates
initial point clouds with associated confidence scores by con-
verting multi-view images into a 3D representation. In contrast
to COLMAP, which requires camera pose estimation directly
from blurred images, DUSt3R can alleviate pose-related inac-
curacies, thus producing more reliable point clouds. However,
existing SfM-free novel-view synthesis approaches [37], [36],
[35] generally operate on sharp images, prompting two crucial
questions for blurred-image scenarios: (1) To what extent can
we rely on DUSt3R’s point clouds? (2) How can we effectively
utilize these point clouds for deblur reconstruction?
A naive strategy would be to employ all points predicted by
DUSt3R. Yet, as illustrated in Figure 2(a, b), the majority of
high-confidence points cluster within a limited region where
the input images overlap. Such an approach over-represents
these regions during Gaussian primitive initialization, increas-
ing computational cost [38], [39]. Furthermore, erroneous
points arising from blurry inputs are indiscriminately included,
adversely impacting NVS accuracy.
A second, more straightforward strategy involves selecting
only high-confidence points. Intuitively, these points appear
more trustworthy under blur. However, our empirical analysis
(Figure 2(b–d)) challenges this assumption. First, we observe
similar confidence histogram distributions for both sharp and
blurred images, with notable proportions of points around 0.75
confidence in each, suggesting that confidence alone is not
a reliable discriminator of erroneous points. Second, when
reconstructing scenes with BAD-GS [3], relaxing the confi-
dence threshold and thereby including more low-confidence
points, actually improves the final performance. This indicates
that low-confidence points still carry essential spatial cues,
and discarding them entirely can lead to a loss of geometric
information. Motivated by these observations, we propose a
sampling strategy named Confidence Balanced Sampling that
leverages DUSt3R’s confidence estimates while preserving
necessary spatial coverage. By carefully balancing the trade-
off between high-confidence selection and overall scene struc-
tural completeness, we aim to mitigate the detrimental effects
of blur-induced errors without forfeiting valuable geometric
information.
Confidence Balanced Sampling. Given blurry image sets
Pi
∈
RH×W ×3 where i
∈
{1, 2, . . . , N}, we process
these images through DUSt3R to generate initial coarse point
clouds P ∈RK×3 and their associated confidence scores
C ∈RK, where K denotes the number of points. The goal
of Confidence Balanced Sampling is to sample L points as
Gaussian primitives for scene reconstruction. We partition

<!-- page 4 -->
4
TABLE I
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF NOVEL VIEW SYNTHESIS ACROSS SIMPLE, MEDIUM, DIFFICULT LEVEL AND REAL-WORLD SCENES. THE TABLE
REPORTS THE AVERAGE PERFORMANCE FOR EACH KIND, DEMONSTRATING THAT OUR METHOD CONSISTENTLY SURPASSES PREVIOUS
STATE-OF-THE-ART APPROACHES ACROSS ALL METRICS. BEST RESULTS IN BOLD, SECOND-BEST UNDERLINED.
Scene Type
Metric
B-NeRF
B-3DGS
UFP-GS
EFN-GS
E2GS
BAD-NeRF
BAD-GS
EDNeRF
Ours
Hard
PSNR↑
21.46
22.01
23.53
23.44
23.57
24.07
23.34
24.20
26.94
SSIM↑
.6222
.6456
.6979
.6998
.7066
.7253
.7408
.7657
.8235
LPIPS↓
.3701
.3373
.2775
.2825
.2761
.2325
.2120
.1979
.1355
Normal
PSNR↑
22.31
22.89
26.88
26.26
28.07
29.35
31.25
31.49
32.09
SSIM↑
.7467
.7623
.8353
.8155
.8821
.9033
.9255
.9389
.9453
LPIPS↓
.3177
.2148
.2084
.2326
.1337
.0998
.0540
.0541
.0406
Real
PSNR↑
15.18
16.69
18.98
19.57
20.61
21.47
22.42
22.57
25.93
SSIM↑
.5777
.6200
.6868
.6972
.6863
.6937
.7129
.7049
.7995
LPIPS↓
.3870
.3296
.2289
.2135
.2124
.2084
.1972
.1940
.0840
the confidence range [cmin, cmax] into M intervals {Bm}M
m=1,
defined as Bm
= [cmin + (m −1)∆, cmin + m∆) with
∆=
cmax−cmin
M
. For each interval Bm, we extract the subset
Sm = {pk ∈P | ck ∈Bm}, where ck is the confidence of
point pk. The sampling process is designed as:
Psampled =
M
[
m=1
{pk | pk ∼P(Sm), P(pk) ∝ck} ,
(1)
where points are randomly selected within each Sm with
probabilities proportional to their confidence. To ensure bal-
anced coverage across confidence levels, we allocate a fixed
number of points
L
M per interval Bm. This enforces sparsity
in low-confidence regions (prone to noise) and dense sampling
in high-confidence regions (critical structures). The resulting
subset Psampled provides high-quality initialization for Gaussian
primitives in deblurring NVS.
One might consider purely spatial sampling (e.g., Farthest
Point Sampling, FPS [39], [38]) to maintain geometric cover-
age. Although spatial sampling can ensure uniform coverage
in clear point clouds, in blurred point clouds it risks selecting
outlier clusters (e.g., duplicated or drifted points), further
distorting the reconstruction. By contrast, our approach treats
DUSt3R’s confidence map as a relative metric in blurred
conditions, striking a balance between high-quality point ex-
traction and overall scene fidelity. We provide a comprehensive
evaluation of this design in our ablation study (Table IV).
B. Progressive Alignment
Blur Images Decouple. Event-based deblurring methods
[12], [40], [24], [25] have recently garnered significant at-
tention. By leveraging the continuous event stream captured
alongside standard RGB frames, these approaches can recon-
struct high-fidelity scenes even under challenging conditions
such as low-light or motion blur. Motivated by these advances,
we introduce event streams into our deblurring pipeline as a
high-dynamic-range semantic prior for guidance. Specifically,
following the strategy of previous works, we adopt the Event-
based Double Integral (EDI) [16] to decouple motion-blurred
images using event data. Detailed event-camera imaging prin-
ciples are omitted here for brevity and can be found in the
supplementary material.
In detail, a motion-blurred image Pi is acquired over the
exposure interval [t0, tu] in tandem with corresponding event
bins {Ek}u
k=1. We denote the latent sharp image at time t1 is
I1. According to the event imaging process, the sharp image
Ik at time tk within each event bin can be expressed as:
Ik = I0eΘ Pk
i=1 Ei, k > 0,
(2)
where Θ is the event-camera response threshold. By assuming
that the blur in Pi is a time-weighted combination of multiple
images [9], and given that the exposure time is uniformly
divided into u segments, Pi can be approximated as the
average of these latent images:
Pi =
I0
u + 1(1 + eΘ P1
i=1 Ei + · · · + eΘ Pu
i=1 Ei).
(3)
From this, we can further infer I0 and Ik at any moment k:
I0 =
(u + 1)Pi
1 + eΘ P1
i=1 Ei + · · · + eΘ Pu
i=1 Ei ,
Ik =
(u + 1)PieΘ Pk
i=1 Ei
1 + eΘ P1
i=1 Ei + · · · + eΘ Pu
i=1 Ei .
(4)
Accordingly, each blurred image Pi can be decomposed into
a set of latent sharp images {Ii
k}u
k=1, each containing richer
texture information.
Latent Motion Modeling. During the exposure period, a
motion-blurred image can be viewed as a sequence of latent
images captured along a camera trajectory, which can be
discretized by poses {T i
k}u
k=1 ∈SE(3). We thus parameterize
and optimize {T i
k}u
k=1 in a bundle-adjustment framework [41]
to jointly recover the camera trajectory responsible for blur
formation. Concretely, we parameterize ∆T i
1 and ∆T i
u and
linearly interpolate intermediate poses in the Lie algebra of
SE(3), where ∆T i represents the pose adjustment. Hence, at
any moment k, the actual pose T i
k for the corresponding latent
image Ii
k is:
T i
k = ˆ
T i · ∆T i
1 · Exp(k
u · Log((∆T i
1)−1∆T i
u)
(5)
where k ∈{1, 2, ..., u} and ˆ
T i denotes the initial pose for
blur images Pi. We optimize ∆T i
1 and ∆T i
u jointly with the
learnable parameters of the Gaussian primitives. Note that
we also refine the original pose for blurred images, as the
DUSt3R-generated poses [38], [37] may be suboptimal.
Event Guided Optimization. In each training iteration, we
simultaneously render u latent sharp images { ˆIi
k}u
k=1 from
3D-GS along the camera trajectories T i
k corresponding to

<!-- page 5 -->
5
TABLE II
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF NOVEL VIEW SYNTHESIS ACROSS
DIFFERENT LEVEL BLUR OF REAL-WORLD SCENES. THE TABLE REPORTS
THE AVERAGE PERFORMANCE FOR EACH KIND, DEMONSTRATING THAT
OUR METHOD CONSISTENTLY SURPASSES PREVIOUS SOTAS.
Level
Metric
B-3DGS
E2GS
BAD-GS
EDNeRF
Ours
1
PSNR↑
18.25
22.88
24.92
24.75
26.84
SSIM↑
.6656
.7502
.7511
.7317
.8272
LPIPS↓
.2728
.1437
.1457
.1727
.0648
2
PSNR↑
17.74
21.32
22.22
21.48
26.27
SSIM↑
.6385
.6905
.6965
.6706
.7858
LPIPS↓
.3061
.2124
.2087
.2219
.1060
3
PSNR↑
15.71
20.54
21.53
22.45
25.90
SSIM↑
.6025
.6629
.6804
.7080
.7862
LPIPS↓
.3580
.2205
.2097
.1979
.0875
4
PSNR↑
15.06
17.71
21.00
21.57
24.72
SSIM↑
.5732
.6415
.6835
.6968
.7824
LPIPS↓
.3815
.2728
.2247
.1994
.0862
each blurred view Pi. A direct strategy would be to align
these renders { ˆIi
k}u
k=1 with the actual latent images {Ii
k}u
k=1.
However, despite containing more texture details than Pi, these
renders do not fully recover ideal latent frames and often
exhibit low visual fidelity (especially in color), thereby degrad-
ing optimization outcomes. To mitigate this, we transform the
renders into grayscale for alignment, thereby removing color
interference while retaining sufficient texture and shape cues:
Le = 1
u
u
X
k=1
∥G( ˆIi
k) −G(Ii
k) ∥1,
(6)
where G(·) denotes the transfer function for gray space.
Next, to simulate the formation of motion-blurred images,
we approximate Eq. 3 by averaging the u latent renders:
ˆ
P i = 1
u
Pu
k=1 ˆIi
k and adopt the same reconstruction loss as in
the original 3D-GS [1]:
Lb = (1 −λb)· ∥ˆ
P i −P i ∥1 +λb · LD-SSIM( ˆ
P i, P i),
(7)
Our total loss combines the above objectives:
L = Lb + λeLe.
(8)
Equation 6 promotes convergence toward the correct pose by
incorporating the EDI-based event prior. Moreover, it helps
the model avoid suboptimal solutions stemming from homo-
geneous pose updates under blurred-image gradients (Eq. 7).
By jointly enforcing geometric, textural, and color fidelity
across multiple views, this overall loss formulation pushes
the model’s deblurring performance to new heights. More
discussion can be referred to our supplementary.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Implementation Details
Our model is implemented based on the official code of
3D-GS [1]. Both the optimization of Gaussians and camera
poses are performed using the Adam optimizer. The learning
rate for Gaussians remains identical to the original 3D-GS.
The training process spans 20,000 iterations, with an event
reconstruction loss introduced after a 3,000-iteration warm up.
We set m = 40 and Qm = 125, which denotes we assume
the exposure time of each blur image can be divided into 40
Com. Street
Minutes
Archives
Restaurant
Edifice
Sanatorium
Town
Boulevard
Scenes
16.09
4.50
19.68
5.75
5.94
4.47
14.67
4.67
26.38
6.25
8.13
4.27
3.57x
3.42x
3.14x
1.33x
4.22x
Average
2.96x
Ours
COLMAP
24.67
8.67
3.03x
2.03x
Fig. 4. Quantitative comparisons of time consuming (min.) of initialization
between COLMAP and DeblurSplat applied in hard scenes. Note that the
COLMAP initialization is based on sharp images (almost fail on blur images).
TABLE III
ANALYSIS OF DEBLURSPLAT. “BALA.” DENOTES THE CONFIDENCE
BALANCED SAMPLING. “PROG.” DENOTES PROGRESSIVE ALIGNMENT.
Bala.
Prog.
Hard
Normal
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
-
-
22.29
.6985
.3037
24.98
.7545
.3123
-
✓
23.82
.7621
.1908
29.85
.9273
.0448
✓
-
23.32
.7337
.2547
26.19
.8470
.1130
✓
✓
26.94
.8235
.1355
32.09
.9453
.0406
internals and sample a total of 5k points. Then, we set λb = 0.2
and λe = 5 × 10−3 for balancing the prior guidance. We set
u = 10 and Θ = 0.27 following manner of previous works
[8], [3], [41]. All experiments were conducted using a single
NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU.
B. Datasets
Referring to [6], [28], we evaluate our method on both
synthetic and real-world datasets. To comprehensively assess
model performance, we introduce three types of benchmarks.
In addition to normal dataset [6], we consider more com-
plicated scenes and propose the hard scenes crafted from
Blender and real-world dataset. No limited in complex en-
vironment condition, we also design the large-scale move-
ment of camera motion, poses a great challenge to general
deblurring reconstruction models. Notably, for baseline eval-
uations in hard scenes, we initialize COLMAP using sharp
images, as COLMAP consistently fails under blurry condi-
tions. As shown in Figure 4, even when processing sharp im-
ages, COLMAP remains computationally expensive whereas
our method achieves almost 2.96× faster performance. More
dataset details are provided in the supplementary material.
C. Experiment Settings
Baselines. We compare our method with three types of
baselines: 1) NeRF [2] and 3D-GS [1] directly trained on
the blurry images, referring to as B-NeRF and B-3DGS. 2)
Deblur rendering methods, including BAD-NeRF [8], BAD-
GS [3], E2 GS [10] and EDNeRF [29]. 3) Image deblur
methods, including UFP [42] (single-image deblurring) and
EFNet [43] (learnable event-based deblurring). We process

<!-- page 6 -->
6
E2GS
Ground Truth
BAD-GS
EDNERF
Ours
Sanatorium
Com. Street
Town
Factory
Cozyroom
(a) Overview of Rendering Novel Views in Hard Scenes 
(b) Overview of Rendering Novel Views in Normal Scenes
Task 1
Task 2
(c) Overview of Rendering Novel Views in Real-world Scenes
Fig. 5. Qualitative comparison on the synthetic and real dataset. It shows that our method achieves better performance in rendering novel views compared
to other SOTAs in deblur reconstruction. More results about NVS and deblurring are presented in the supplementary.
input blurry images with them and train the vanilla 3D-GS
with pre-deblurred images.
Evaluation Metrics. We employ the Peak Signal-to-Noise Ra-
tio (PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [44],
and VGG-based Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity
(LPIPS) [45] to evaluate the similarity between rendered views
and ground truth views.
D. Performance
Synthetic Data Experiments. We evaluate our approach
across a diverse set of synthetic scenes, including both nor-
mal and challenging (hard) scenarios. Quantitative results for
novel view synthesis are presented in Table I, while detailed
deblurring results of the input views can be found in the
supplementary material. Our method demonstrates significant
improvements across most metrics, particularly in challenging
scenes, achieving a +2.74 dB increase in PSNR, a +5.78%
boost in SSIM, and a +6.24% improvement in LPIPS. Specif-
ically, both B-NeRF and B-3DGS generate blurry novel views
as they are directly trained on blurred images. Compared to
the BAD-Series methods [8], [3], our results highlight the ad-
vantages of leveraging event priors and dense stereo guidance.

<!-- page 7 -->
7
TABLE IV
ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT SAMPLING METHODS IN INITIALIZATION.
Method
Hard
Normal
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Center
26.20
.8078
.1746
30.25
.9296
.0770
Random
26.63
.8175
.1386
31.84
.9451
.0413
Spatial
26.57
.8166
.1406
32.08
.9459
.0405
Balanced
26.94
.8235
.1355
32.09
.9453
.0406
Additionally, while EDNeRF [30] attempts to decouple each
blurry image into a single sharp prior, it fails to capture the
continuous features and fine-grained variations in the event
stream, ultimately leading to inferior performance.
Real Data Experiments. In this section, we analyze our
model’s performance independently from the overall evalua-
tion, focusing on different degrees of blur. As shown in Table I,
our method outperforms state-of-the-art approaches, achieving
a notable improvement of +3.36 dB in PSNR, +8.66% in
SSIM, and +6.24% in LPIPS, demonstrating its practical
applicability in real-world scenarios. We further investigate
the impact of varying blur levels, as detailed in Table II. Our
findings indicate that as the degree of blurring increases, the
performance of all deblurring methods declines to varying
extents. However, our approach consistently maintains superior
performance, achieving a +2.15 dB gain in PSNR, highlighting
its effective utilization of knowledge from DUSt3R and event
streams. Additional results can be found in the supplementary.
Qualitative Results. Qualitative results are presented in Figure
5, which demonstrates that our method effectively generates
high-quality scene representations with intricate details, even
when trained on a series of blurred images. EDNeRF [30]
shows overall strong performance, but it still exhibits some
deficiencies, particularly in areas with significant color and
light variation. This highlights the advantage of using explicit
Gaussian splatting representation over implicit neural repre-
sentations. In Figure 5, it is clear that 3DGS-based methods
[3], [10] struggle to model regions with significant depth
variations, mainly due to their heavy reliance on simulating
blurry imaging processes or using latent sharp images. When
applied to more complex scenes, such as those in Figure 5(a,c),
these methods experience performance collapse.
E. Ablation Study
In this section, we perform detailed study to investigate our
designed modules in DeblurSplat by utilizing the NVS task.
More ablation study can be referred to supplementry.
Overview. As shown in Table I, we first analyze the im-
pact of each designed module. For our baseline, we adopt
the standard 3DGS performance using only COLMAP ini-
tialization (B-3DGS). When incorporating only the ”Bala”
module, performance improves significantly over COLMAP
initialization (+1.03 dB PSNR in hard scenes), benefiting
from the fine-grained point clouds generated by a well-
pretrained model. However, this approach still struggles with
deblurring reconstruction, as it learns solely from blurred
images without additional refinements. On the other hand,
utilizing only the ”Prog.” module yields high-fidelity deblurred
210
214
217
FPS
Fig. 6.
Analysis of efficiency of Confidence Balanced Sampling (CBS) in
Hard Scenes. Here, we utilize the PSNR in deblur view rendering as the
evaluation metric.
reconstructions, leveraging the rich semantic information from
the event stream. Finally, by integrating both techniques, we
achieve the best overall performance for NVS.
Sampling Techniques. We investigate the impact of different
sampling methods for generating point clouds, as shown in Ta-
ble IV. The ”Spatial” method employs Farthest Point Sampling
(FPS) within adaptive voxel grids [38]. The ”Random” method
directly samples points from the point cloud without any
constraints. The ”Center” method selects a high-confidence
point cloud center and randomly samples points within its
average geometric distance. Our findings indicate that the
”Center” method leads to performance degradation, as it filters
out distant points that play a crucial role in enhancing gener-
alization ability. Meanwhile, the ”Random” method, despite
the possibility of sampling less relevant points, maintains
high NVS quality. This supports our hypothesis in Section
III-B—that even lower-confidence points can carry meaningful
semantics and contribute to performance. Although the ”Spa-
tial” method performs well in simple scenes, it struggles in
more challenging scenarios. By relying on geometric distance,
it increases the likelihood of sampling less informative points,
ultimately limiting its robustness in complex environments.
Initialization Efficiency. We first evaluate the efficiency of
the Confidence Balanced Sampling (CBS) module. As shown
in Figure 6, applying CBS to Bad-GS [3] leads to both
higher performance and faster convergence. Notably, with
only 12,500 training steps, our method achieves performance
comparable to Bad-GS trained for 20,000 steps. Moreover, all
configurations maintain a rendering speed of over 210 FPS,
demonstrating the efficient knowledge utilization of the dense
stereo module (DUSt3R).
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we introduce DeblurSplat, the first SfM-
free deblurring framework for 3D-GS that integrates event-
camera priors with DUSt3R’s robust initialization. By leverag-
ing Confidence Balanced Sampling, we ensure reliable point
cloud initialization, while Progressive Alignment effectively
refines motion-blurry pixels using event-stream semantics. Our
method outperforms previous motion-deblur reconstruction
approaches across diverse synthetic and real-world datasets,
demonstrating superior robustness under varying blur levels.
These results highlight the effectiveness of SfM-free deblur-
ring and event-based priors in enhancing 3D scene reconstruc-
tion.

<!-- page 8 -->
8
REFERENCES
[1] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.” ACM TOG, vol. 42,
no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023.
[2] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106,
2021.
[3] L. Zhao, P. Wang, and P. Liu, “Bad-gaussians: Bundle adjusted deblur
gaussian splatting,” in ECCV.
Springer, 2025, pp. 233–250.
[4] J. L. Sch¨onberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,”
in CVPR, 2016.
[5] S. Wang, V. Leroy, Y. Cabon, B. Chidlovskii, and J. Revaud, “Dust3r:
Geometric 3d vision made easy,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
20 697–20 709.
[6] L. Ma, X. Li, J. Liao, Q. Zhang, X. Wang, J. Wang, and P. V.
Sander, “Deblur-nerf: Neural radiance fields from blurry images,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 12 861–12 870.
[7] D. Lee, M. Lee, C. Shin, and S. Lee, “Dp-nerf: Deblurred neural radiance
field with physical scene priors,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
12 386–12 396.
[8] P. Wang, L. Zhao, R. Ma, and P. Liu, “Bad-nerf: Bundle adjusted deblur
neural radiance fields,” in CVPR, 2023, pp. 4170–4179.
[9] G. Gallego, T. Delbr¨uck, G. Orchard, C. Bartolozzi, B. Taba, A. Censi,
S. Leutenegger, A. J. Davison, J. Conradt, K. Daniilidis et al., “Event-
based vision: A survey,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, vol. 44, no. 1, pp. 154–180, 2020.
[10] H. Deguchi, M. Masuda, T. Nakabayashi, and H. Saito, “E2gs: Event
enhanced gaussian splatting,” in ICIP.
IEEE, 2024, pp. 1676–1682.
[11] Y. Qi, J. Li, Y. Zhao, Y. Zhang, and L. Zhu, “E3nerf: Efficient event-
enhanced neural radiance fields from blurry images,” arXiv:2408.01840,
2024.
[12] W. Yu, C. Feng, J. Tang, X. Jia, L. Yuan, and Y. Tian, “Evagaus-
sians: Event stream assisted gaussian splatting from blurry images,”
arXiv:2405.20224, 2024.
[13] T. Yura, A. Mirzaei, and I. Gilitschenski, “Eventsplat: 3d gaus-
sian splatting from moving event cameras for real-time rendering,”
arXiv:2412.07293, 2024.
[14] G. R. Matta, R. Trisha, and K. Mitra, “Besplat–gaussian splatting from
a single blurry image and event stream,” arXiv:2412.19370, 2024.
[15] Z. Zhang, K. Chen, and L. Wang, “Elite-evgs: Learning event-based 3d
gaussian splatting by distilling event-to-video priors,” arXiv:2409.13392,
2024.
[16] L. Pan, C. Scheerlinck, X. Yu, R. Hartley, M. Liu, and Y. Dai, “Bringing
a blurry frame alive at high frame-rate with an event camera,” in CVPR,
2019, pp. 6820–6829.
[17] S. Elflein, Q. Zhou, S. Agostinho, and L. Leal-Taix´e, “Light3r-
sfm: Towards feed-forward structure-from-motion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2501.14914, 2025.
[18] J. Lu, T. Huang, P. Li, Z. Dou, C. Lin, Z. Cui, Z. Dong, S.-K. Yeung,
W. Wang, and Y. Liu, “Align3r: Aligned monocular depth estimation for
dynamic videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.03079, 2024.
[19] J. Xu, S. Gao, and Y. Shan, “Freesplatter: Pose-free gaussian splatting
for sparse-view 3d reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09573,
2024.
[20] S. Zhang, J. Wang, Y. Xu, N. Xue, C. Rupprecht, X. Zhou, Y. Shen,
and G. Wetzstein, “Flare: Feed-forward geometry, appearance and
camera estimation from uncalibrated sparse views,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2502.12138, 2025.
[21] V. Rudnev, M. Elgharib, C. Theobalt, and V. Golyanik, “Eventnerf:
Neural radiance fields from a single colour event camera,” in CVPR,
2023, pp. 4992–5002.
[22] S. Klenk, L. Koestler, D. Scaramuzza, and D. Cremers, “E-nerf: Neural
radiance fields from a moving event camera,” IEEE RAL, vol. 8, no. 3,
pp. 1587–1594, 2023.
[23] T. Xiong, J. Wu, B. He, C. Fermuller, Y. Aloimonos, H. Huang, and
C. Metzler, “Event3dgs: Event-based 3d gaussian splatting for high-
speed robot egomotion,” in 8th Annual Conference on Robot Learning,
2024.
[24] H. Han, J. Li, H. Wei, and X. Ji, “Event-3dgs: Event-based 3d re-
construction using 3d gaussian splatting,” in The Thirty-eighth Annual
Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[25] W. F. Low and G. H. Lee, “Robust e-nerf: Nerf from sparse & noisy
events under non-uniform motion,” in ICCV, 2023, pp. 18 335–18 346.
[26] ——, “Deblur e-nerf: Nerf from motion-blurred events under high-speed
or low-light conditions,” in ECCV.
Springer, 2025, pp. 192–209.
[27] J. Wu, S. Zhu, C. Wang, B. Shi, and E. Y. Lam, “Sweepevgs: Event-
based 3d gaussian splatting for macro and micro radiance field rendering
from a single sweep,” arXiv:2412.11579, 2024.
[28] Y. Qi, L. Zhu, Y. Zhang, and J. Li, “E2nerf: Event enhanced neural
radiance fields from blurry images,” in ICCV, 2023, pp. 13 254–13 264.
[29] J. Wu, S. Zhu, C. Wang, and E. Y. Lam, “Ev-gs: Event-based gaussian
splatting for efficient and accurate radiance field rendering,” in MLSP.
IEEE, 2024, pp. 1–6.
[30] M. Cannici and D. Scaramuzza, “Mitigating motion blur in neural
radiance fields with events and frames,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 9286–9296.
[31] Y. Chen, C. Yang, J. Fang, X. Zhang, L. Xie, W. Shen, W. Dai, H. Xiong,
and Q. Tian, “Liftimage3d: Lifting any single image to 3d gaussians with
video generation priors,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09597, 2024.
[32] J. Yang, A. Sax, K. J. Liang, M. Henaff, H. Tang, A. Cao, J. Chai,
F. Meier, and M. Feiszli, “Fast3r: Towards 3d reconstruction of 1000+
images in one forward pass,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.13928, 2025.
[33] V. Leroy, Y. Cabon, and J. Revaud, “Grounding image matching in 3d
with mast3r,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer,
2024, pp. 71–91.
[34] S. Hong, J. Jung, H. Shin, J. Han, J. Yang, C. Luo, and S. Kim,
“Pf3plat: Pose-free feed-forward 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.22128, 2024.
[35] B. Smart, C. Zheng, I. Laina, and V. A. Prisacariu, “Splatt3r: Zero-
shot gaussian splatting from uncalibrated image pairs,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.13912, 2024.
[36] B. Ye, S. Liu, H. Xu, X. Li, M. Pollefeys, M.-H. Yang, and S. Peng, “No
pose, no problem: Surprisingly simple 3d gaussian splats from sparse
unposed images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24207, 2024.
[37] Y. Tang, Y. Guo, D. Li, and C. Peng, “Spars3r: Semantic prior align-
ment and regularization for sparse 3d reconstruction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.12592, 2024.
[38] Z. Fan, W. Cong, K. Wen, K. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Ding, D. Xu,
B. Ivanovic, M. Pavone, G. Pavlakos et al., “Instantsplat: Unbounded
sparse-view pose-free gaussian splatting in 40 seconds,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.20309, vol. 2, no. 3, p. 4, 2024.
[39] C. R. Qi, L. Yi, H. Su, and L. J. Guibas, “Pointnet++: Deep hierarchical
feature learning on point sets in a metric space,” Advances in neural
information processing systems, vol. 30, 2017.
[40] H. Rebecq, R. Ranftl, V. Koltun, and D. Scaramuzza, “High speed and
high dynamic range video with an event camera,” IEEE transactions on
pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 43, no. 6, pp. 1964–1980,
2019.
[41] J. Huang, C. Dong, and P. Liu, “Inceventgs: Pose-free gaussian splatting
from a single event camera,” arXiv:2410.08107, 2024.
[42] Z. Fang, F. Wu, W. Dong, X. Li, J. Wu, and G. Shi, “Self-supervised non-
uniform kernel estimation with flow-based motion prior for blind image
deblurring,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2023, pp. 18 105–18 114.
[43] L. Sun, C. Sakaridis, J. Liang, Q. Jiang, K. Yang, P. Sun, Y. Ye, K. Wang,
and L. V. Gool, “Event-based fusion for motion deblurring with cross-
modal attention,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer,
2022, pp. 412–428.
[44] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE
transactions on image processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.
[45] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The
unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2018, pp. 586–595.
[46] F. Plastria, “The weiszfeld algorithm: proof, amendments, and exten-
sions,” Foundations of location analysis, pp. 357–389, 2011.
[47] M. FISCHLER AND, “Random sample consensus: a paradigm for
model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated car-
tography,” Commun. ACM, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 381–395, 1981.
[48] V. Lepetit, F. Moreno-Noguer, and P. Fua, “Ep n p: An accurate o (n)
solution to the p n p problem,” International journal of computer vision,
vol. 81, pp. 155–166, 2009.
[49] D. Gehrig, M. Gehrig, J. Hidalgo-Carri´o, and D. Scaramuzza, “Video
to events: Recycling video datasets for event cameras,” in IEEE Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog. (CVPR), June 2020.
[50] D. Gehrig and D. Scaramuzza, “Video to events: Recycling video
datasets for event cameras,” in IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.
(CVPR), June 2020.

<!-- page 9 -->
9
APPENDIX A
PRELIMINARIES
A. Event generation model
Unlike frame-based cameras that record the brightness of
each pixel at a fixed frame rate [9], the event camera asyn-
chronously generates an event e(x, y, τ, p) when the changes
of the brightness of pixel (x, y) reach threshold Θ in the log
domain at time τ as follows:
px,y,τ =
(
−1,
log(Ix,y,τ) −log(Ix,y,τ−∆τ) < −Θ,
+1,
log(Ix,y,τ) −log(Ix,y,τ−∆τ) > Θ,
(9)
Ek = {ei(xi, yi, τi, pi)}tk−1<τi<tk,
(10)
where p indicates the direction of brightness change, I(x,y,τ)
is the brightness value of pixel (x, y) at time τ. Since the
event camera does not have the concept of frame, to facilitate
processing and representation, we usually divide the events
into m event bins by time. In this work, given a blurred
image with exposure time from tstart to t{end} and the
corresponding event data {ei}tstart<τi≤tend, we can generate
{Ek}u
k=1, where tk = tstart + k
b texp is the time division point
between bins and texp = tstart −tend is exposure time.
B. DUSt3R Details
Training Details. The training objective of DUSt3R is
based on regression of the unprojected and normalized point
maps of two input views. Here, the ground-truth pointmaps
from the datasets are
ˆP1,1 and
ˆP2,1 obtained from two
corresponding views 1,2 where the camera origin as view 1,
on which the ground-truth is defined. The regression loss for
training DUSt3R is as:
Lreg =∥1
zi
· Pv,1 −1
ˆzi
· ˆPv,1 ∥,
(11)
where view v ∈{1, 2}, P and
ˆP are the prediction and
ground-truth, separately. To handle the scale ambiguity be-
tween prediction and ground-truth, DUSt3R normalizes the
predicted and ground-truth pointmaps by scaling factors zi =
norm(P1,1, P2,1) and ˆzi =
norm( ˆ
P1,1, ˆ
P2,1) respectively,
which simply represent the average distance, denoted as D of
all valid points to the origin. Then, the pixel-wise confidence
Ci
v,1 is defined and optimized as:
Lconf =
X
v∈{1,2}
X
i∈Dv
Ci
v,1 · Lreg(v, i) −α · log Ci
v,1, (12)
where α is a hyper-parameter controlling the regularization
term, encouraging the model to extrapolate in harder areas.
Recovering Camera Parameters. We assume the camera
intrinsics are the same for all the views in the trajectory and
obtain 1:1 mapping from the pixel lattice to pointmap where
we can build the mapping from 2D to the camera coordinate
system. We can first solve the simple optimization problem to
calculate per-camera focal:
f ∗= arg min
f
W
X
i=0
H
X
j=0
Oi,j
(i′, j′) −f (P i,j,0, P i,j,1)
P i,j,2
 ,
(13)
where i′ = i −W
2 and j′ = j −H
2 denotes the normalized 2D
image coordinate, P i,j,k, k ∈{0, 1, 2} denotes the predictive
pointmaps, W and H denotes the shape of point maps.
Following DUSt3R [5], we use the Weiszfeld algorithm [46]
to estimate f ∗. Assuming a single-camera setup similar to that
used in COLMAP for a single scene capture, we propose
stabilizing the estimated focal length by averaging across
all training views: f =
1
N
PN
i=1 f ∗
i , which is utilized in
subsequent processes. Relative transformation T = [R|t] can
be computed by RANSAC [47] with PnP [48] for each image
pair.
Pair-wise to Globally Aligned Poses. DUSt3R originally
takes image pairs as inputs where post-processing is required
to align the scale if more than two views are captured from
the scene. The underlying reason is that the predicted point
map are at the normalized scales within its own, and such
misalignment of each independent calculated relative poses
leads to significant scale variance, resulting in inaccurate
camera poses. Similar to DUSt3R we first construct a complete
connectivity graph G(V, E) of all the N input views, where
the vertices V and each edge e = (n, m) ∈E indicate a
shared visual content between images In and Im. To convert
the initially predicted point map, {(Pi ∈RH×W ×3)}N
i=1 to
be a globally aligned one {( ˜
Pi ∈RH×W ×3)}N
i=1, we update
the point maps, transformation matrix, and a scale factor: For
the complete graph, any image pair e = (n, m) ∈E, the
point maps Pn,n, Pm,n and confidence maps On,n, Om,n.
For clarity, let us define Pn,e := Pn,n, Pm,e := Pm,n,
On,e := On,n, and Om,e := Om,n. The optimization for the
transformation matrix of edge Te, scaling factor σe and point
map ˜P are given by:
˜P ∗= arg min
˜
P ,T ,σ
X
e∈E
X
v∈e
HW
X
i=1
Oi
v,e
 ˜P i
v −σeTeP i
v,e
 .
(14)
Here, we slightly abuse notation and use v ∈e for v ∈{n, m}
if e = {n, m}. The idea is that, for a given pair e, the same
rigid transformation Te should align both pointmaps Pn,e and
Pm,e are by definition both expressed in the same coordinate
frame. To avoid the trivial optimum where σe = 0, ∀e ∈E,
DUSt3R enforces Q
e σe = 1. This post-processing step yields
a globally aligned point cloud within only seconds.
C. 3D Gaussian Splatting
Following 3D-GS [1], the scene is represented by a series of
3D Gaussians. Each Gaussian, denoted as G, is parameterized
by its mean position µ ∈R3, 3D covariance Σ ∈R3×3,
opacity o ∈R and color c ∈R3. The distribution of each
scaled Gaussian is defined as:
G(x) = e−1
2 (x−µ)⊤Σ−1(x−µ).
(15)
To ensure that the 3D covariance Σ remains positive semi-
definite, which is physically meaningful, and to reduce the
optimization difficulty, 3D-GS represents Σ using a scale S ∈
R3 and rotation matrix R ∈R3×3 stored by a quaternion
q ∈R4:
Σ = RSST RT .
(16)

<!-- page 10 -->
10
Sanatorium
Commercial Street
Boulevard
Town
Archives
Restaurant
Edifice
Fig. 7. Illustration of our crafted hard scene datasets. For each scene, the first line is the rendered mode and the second line is the wire frame mode with
random colors. Each scene has diverse and multiple objects and complex lightning involving daylight and night, which is more complicated than synthesis
dataset from BAD-NeRF [8].
In order to enable differentiable Gaussian rasterization, 3D-
GS projects 3D Gaussians to 2D from a given camera pose
Tc = {Rc ∈R3×3, tc ∈R3}, for rasterizing and rendering
using the following equation,
Σ′ = JRcΣRT
c JT ,
(17)
where Σ′ ∈R2×2 is the 2D covariance matrix, J ∈R2×3
is the Jacobian of the affine approximation of the projective
transformation. Afterward, each pixel color is rendered by
rasterizing these N sorted 2D Gaussians based on their depths,
following the formulation:
C =
N
X
i
ciαi
i−1
Y
j
(1 −αj),
(18)
where Ci is the learnable color of each Gaussian, and αi is
the alpha value computed by evaluating a 2D covariance Σ′
multiplied with the learned Gaussian opacity o:
αi = oi · exp(−σi),
σi = 1
2∆T
i Σ′−1∆i,
(19)
where ∆∈R2 is the offset between the pixel center and
the 2D Gaussian center. The derivations presented above
demonstrate that the rendered pixel color, denoted as C in
Eq. 18, is a function that is differentiable with respect to all
of the learnable Gaussians G and the camera poses Tc.
APPENDIX B
DISCUSSION OF PROGRESSIVE ALIGNMENT
The main idea is to use the latent images decoupled from
the event stream for simulated pose supervision through EDI.
Regarding the utilization of events as a deblur prior, pre-
vious works [10], [28], [12] require inputting latent sharp
images to obtain the corresponding camera poses, which
is time-consuming. Moreover, sparse point clouds initialized
from Ii
k
m
k=1 often contain inaccurate semantic points due to
biases introduced during the EDI decoupling process [12].
Ev-DeblurNeRF [30] uses only the middle latent sharp im-
age as a prior, failing to take advantage of the continuous
response generated by the high dynamic characteristics of

<!-- page 11 -->
11
Archives
Com. Street
Edifice
Restaurant
Sanatorium
Town
Boulevard
Fig. 8. Illustration of our crafted camera trajectory for hard scenes. Compared to normal scene datasets [6]. The average movement distance of the camera
trajectory we proposed is over 10 meters, and the focus view is constantly switched every frame, which poses a great challenge to general deblurring
reconstruction models.
events. This results in the loss of important scene details
within the exposure time. In contrast, our approach utilizes
the decoupled latent sharp images to correct inaccurate camera
poses initialized from DUSt3R. The priors from DUSt3R and
the event camera are efficiently fused, complementing each
other within this deblur framework.
APPENDIX C
DATASET
A. Synthetic Dataset Details
We construct a synthetic dataset that spans a diverse range
of scene scales, incorporating various camera trajectories and
event data. To systematically evaluate model performance, we
categorize the Blender-synthesized dataset into two difficulty
levels based on object count, scene complexity, and other
critical factors. For the normal level, we directly adopt the
dataset proposed in Deblur-NeRF [6], which comprises five
scenes: Factory, Wine, Tanabata, Pool, and Cozyroom. For
the hard level, we create seven additional indoor and outdoor
scenes using Blender and further integrate five 3D scenes from
BAD-NeRF [8]. To simulate motion-blurred images, we design
diverse camera trajectories across these scenes and generate
corresponding event streams using ESIM [49]. Motion blur is
introduced by manually placing multi-view cameras, randomly
perturbing camera poses, and interpolating linearly between
the original and adjusted positions for each view. The final
blurred images are obtained by rendering images from these
interpolated poses and blending them in the RGB space.
These seven crafted scenes serve as challenging benchmarks
due to their high object density, complex lighting conditions,
rich texture details, and large-scale camera movements. As
Fig. 9. Illustration of our equipment for creating real datasets.

<!-- page 12 -->
12
(a)
5e3
(b)
5e4
(c)
1.25e5
(d)
2.5e5
(e)
5e5
(i)
(ii)
(iii)
Fig. 10.
Different blur degrees for each scene in the real-world dataset captured using the DVS346 camera. To capture videos with varying blur levels, we
controlled the exposure times across different scenes. The dataset contains frames with varying exposure durations, displayed in the following order: (a) 5e3,
(b) 5e4, (c) 1.25e5, (d) 2.5e5, and (e) 5e5 µs.
shown in Figure 8, the proposed camera trajectories feature
an average displacement exceeding 10 meters, with the focal
view dynamically shifting in every frame, imposing significant
challenges for general deblurring and reconstruction models.
Following prior works [2], [6], we set the number of ren-
dered images to 34 for both normal and hard scenes. Figure
7 presents visualizations of our crafted scenes. A detailed
overview of the design objectives for these challenging scenes
is provided below:
• Town: We created this urban scene with a tram and
parked cars to test the robustness of deblurring and
3D reconstruction algorithms in handling dynamic urban
environments with various moving and stationary objects.
• Sanatorium: We created this scene featuring a grand
mansion and its surrounding garden to evaluate the accu-
racy and detail preservation of deblurring and 3D recon-
struction algorithms in capturing intricate architectural
elements and lush natural environments.
• Commercial Street: We created this nighttime urban scene
with complex lighting, reflective surfaces and dynamic
elements like vehicles and pedestrians.
• Boulevard: We want to test the model to handle multiple
light sources, reflectionsand the complexity of urban
traffic at night, which includes numerous vehicles and
varying light intensities.
• Archives: This scene was designed in an interior setting
with abundant natural light, complex architectural details,
and varying depths, simulating the challenges of captur-
ing a well-lit, intricate space with multiple little books.
• Restaurant: This scene was crafted to test model to handle
complex lighting scenarios, multiple objects, and varying
degrees of occlusion in a dimly lit outdoor setting with
reflective surfaces and string lights.
• Edifice: This urban scene was created to evaluate model
to process complex materials like glass and metal, handle
dynamic lighting conditions, and capture intricate details
amidst the hustle of traffic and architectural variety.
APPENDIX D
REAL-WORLD DATASET WITH MULTIPLE LEVELS OF
MOTION BLUR
To evaluate performance in real-world scenarios, we man-
ually recorded five scenes using the Color DAVIS346 event
camera [50], which features a resolution of 340 × 260 pixels
and an exposure time of 100 milliseconds for RGB frames. To

<!-- page 13 -->
13
TABLE V
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ACROSS DIFFERENT MODELS AND ENVIRONMENTS FOR PSNR↑
IN NOVEL VIEWS SYNTHESIS.
Models
Hard
Normal
Sanatorium
Com. Street
Archives
Restaurant
Boulevard
Edifice
Town
Cozyroom
Factory
Pool
Tanabata
Wine
Blurry-NeRF
20.58
21.64
17.93
18.70
23.39
22.97
25.03
26.48
23.41
24.45
19.65
17.60
Blurry-GS
20.90
21.60
18.44
18.99
24.10
23.39
26.69
27.73
23.91
24.56
20.11
18.18
UFP-GS
21.77
23.97
20.11
21.86
26.49
23.02
27.54
28.90
27.16
29.56
24.62
24.19
EFN-GS
21.85
23.98
20.28
21.29
26.52
22.77
27.41
28.09
25.84
29.42
23.88
24.07
E2GS
22.00
24.18
19.92
21.29
26.89
23.13
27.64
30.44
26.96
31.02
26.05
25.92
BAD-NeRF
22.16
24.43
20.50
21.73
27.84
23.48
28.42
30.92
27.96
32.60
28.16
27.12
BAD-Gaussians
25.59
18.95
22.34
23.80
28.32
25.42
25.97
32.35
28.18
33.30
31.00
31.44
EvDeblurNeRF
22.20
24.67
20.82
21.82
27.85
23.61
28.44
32.84
28.95
35.82
30.27
29.59
Ours
24.88
26.63
22.06
23.72
33.30
26.55
31.59
33.14
30.25
36.30
31.34
29.45
TABLE VI
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ACROSS DIFFERENT MODELS AND ENVIRONMENTS FOR SSIM↑
IN NOVEL VIEWS SYNTHESIS.
Models
Hard
Normal
Sanatorium
Com. Street
Archives
Restaurant
Boulevard
Edifice
Town
Cozyroom
Factory
Pool
Tanabata
Wine
Blurry-NeRF
.6215
.5375
.5405
.4604
.7366
.7285
.7306
.8621
.8178
.6119
.8026
.6393
Blurry-GS
.6316
.5504
.5553
.4733
.7719
.7519
.7855
.8774
.8379
.6149
.8198
.6617
UFP-GS
.6431
.6687
.5987
.5867
.8410
.7524
.7948
.9035
.8307
.8199
.8311
.7916
EFN-GS
.6504
.6724
.6080
.5872
.8457
.7434
.7920
.8731
.8079
.8154
.7949
.7866
E2GS
.6613
.6782
.6010
.5929
.8536
.7571
.8023
.9331
.8761
.8634
.8828
.8555
BAD-NeRF
.6684
.6955
.6221
.6131
.8834
.7676
.8275
.9362
.8905
.9064
.9057
.8779
BAD-Gaussians
.8140
.4563
.7253
.7438
.8894
.8166
.7404
.9278
.9164
.8964
.9427
.9443
EvDeblurNeRF
.7057
.7372
.6554
.6618
.9235
.8022
.8744
.9566
.9158
.9521
.9471
.9233
Ours
.7828
.7982
.6976
.7359
.9657
.8642
.9202
.9607
.9293
.9575
.9562
.9229
TABLE VII
PERFORMANCE COMPARISON ACROSS DIFFERENT MODELS AND ENVIRONMENTS FOR LPIPS↓
IN NOVEL VIEWS SYNTHESIS.
Models
Hard
Normal
Sanatorium
Com. Street
Archives
Restaurant
Boulevard
Edifice
Town
Cozyroom
Factory
Pool
Tanabata
Wine
Blurry-NeRF
.3722
.4437
.4735
.4428
.3140
.2880
.2567
.2718
.2656
.4159
.1894
.4463
Blurry-GS
.3559
.4178
.4400
.4328
.2707
.2485
.1955
.1250
.1579
.3629
.1261
.3025
UFP-GS
.4126
.3032
.2940
.4055
.1237
.2233
.1804
.1035
.2369
.2241
.2251
.2528
EFN-GS
.4108
.3194
.2928
.4136
.1314
.2320
.1775
.1433
.2520
.2275
.2731
.2673
E2GS
.3914
.3129
.3001
.4141
.1222
.2187
.1736
.0628
.1708
.1387
.1375
.1590
BAD-NeRF
.3412
.2705
.2433
.3613
.0879
.1906
.1331
.0501
.1375
.0937
.0954
.1226
BAD-Gaussians
.1591
.3719
.1542
.2257
.0909
.1388
.3439
.0340
.0990
.0551
.0478
.0345
EvDeblurNeRF
.2781
.2386
.2011
.3345
.0647
.1608
.1082
.0314
.1011
.0377
.0437
.0569
Ours
.1944
.1424
.1532
.2492
.0348
.0952
.0797
.0253
.0778
.0254
.0279
.0467
further facilitate the reality demand, we construct the this real-
world blur datasets. We equip the DAVIS346 event camera on
the UR-5E robotic arm as shown in Figure 9. The goal of our
dataset is to capture video frames and event data from the same
scene with varying blur levels. To achieve this, we controlled
the camera’s motion using a robotic arm that performed non-
linear movements while adjusting the exposure time to induce
different levels of blur. For accurate alignment of the videos
with varying blur degrees, we used an IMU with a 1000 Hz
sampling rate in combination with a registration algorithm to
achieve millisecond-level temporal synchronization. We define
5 tasks and each task contains 5 kinds of blur in different
exposure time (5e3, 5e4, 1.25e5, 2.5e5 and 5e5). We design
a time interval alignment algorithm to match and correct all
images and event streams. Finally, we utilize the blur degree
of 5e3 as the ground truth sets and the scenes at other exposure
times are used as a blur dataset. The images we captured are
shown in Figure 10. We found that each scenes with different
blur and limited image numbers (less than 30) easily fails in
initialization with COLMAP. Hence, we initialize these scenes
by our method and simulate the sparse condition by random
sampling 1k points on point clouds.
APPENDIX E
DETAILED EXPERIMENTS
A. Synthetic Experiments
Here, we present the detailed performance evaluation of
various state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods across different syn-

<!-- page 14 -->
14
TABLE VIII
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF DEBLUR VIEW RENDERING ACROSS REAL-WORLD SCENES. BEST RESULTS IN BOLD.
Scene Type
Metric
B-NeRF
B-3DGS
UFP-GS
EFN-GS
E2GS
BAD-NeRF
BAD-GS
EDNeRF
Ours
Task1
PSNR↑
19.08
20.87
22.52
22.63
25.05
25.75
26.28
26.31
27.07
SSIM↑
.6876
.7402
.7900
.7899
.8253
.8289
.8307
.8303
.8546
LPIPS↓
.4115
.3311
.1114
.1172
.0972
.0932
.0929
.0916
.0679
Task2
PSNR↑
13.21
14.23
12.03
12.77
13.84
18.63
20.47
20.60
29.03
SSIM↑
.5844
.6112
.4267
.5061
.4292
.5030
.5264
.5326
.7766
LPIPS↓
.4180
.3452
.3807
.3320
.3925
.3492
.3211
.3165
.0645
Task3
PSNR↑
16.25
17.86
20.82
21.98
23.89
24.50
24.82
24.66
28.39
SSIM↑
.6016
.6721
.6726
.7198
.7281
.7323
.7259
.7162
.8364
LPIPS↓
.3555
.2665
.3108
.2745
.2373
.2272
.2223
.2332
.1051
Task4
PSNR↑
17.27
20.28
16.38
17.99
19.26
18.42
19.34
20.32
25.76
SSIM↑
.7107
.7798
.6791
.6871
.6803
.6612
.6768
.6914
.8016
LPIPS↓
.3018
.1965
.2471
.2305
.2337
.2605
.2500
.2276
.0923
Task5
PSNR↑
18.01
19.98
22.92
22.66
24.21
24.34
24.85
24.53
25.98
SSIM↑
.6982
.7541
.8195
.8150
.8313
.8307
.8330
.8295
.8556
LPIPS↓
.3122
.2330
.1038
.1162
.0986
.0921
.0880
.0931
.0651
TABLE IX
ANALYSIS OF WEIGHT λe IN OPTIMIZATION OBJECTIVES.
λe
Hard
Normal
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
5e-3
26.94
.8235
.1355
32.09
.9453
.0406
5e-2
23.14
.7149
.1114
32.61
.9476
.0471
5e-1
27.21
.8357
.1301
31.89
.9420
.0557
1.0
27.33
.8372
.1298
31.24
.9320
.0670
TABLE X
ANALYSIS OF DIFFERENT SAMPLING NUMBER IN INITIALIZATION.
Num.
Hard
Normal
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
5,000
26.94
.8235
.1355
32.09
.9453
.0406
10,000
26.76
.8198
.1341
31.97
.9459
.0458
50,000
26.43
.8070
.1402
31.35
.9336
.0511
100,000
26.25
.8012
.1064
30.73
.9237
.0553
thetic scenarios, as shown in Tables V, VI, and VII. In terms
of PSNR, our method consistently achieves state-of-the-art
performance across multiple scenarios, obtaining the highest
PSNR values in 8 out of the 12 evaluated scenes. Notably, it
significantly outperforms existing approaches in challenging
environments such as Boulevard (33.30 dB), Town (31.59 dB),
and Tanabata (31.34 dB), surpassing the second-best results by
margins of 4.98 dB, 3.15 dB, and 0.34 dB, respectively. These
results demonstrate the superior robustness of our method
to motion blur in complex scenarios compared to existing
SOTA methods. Furthermore, while maintaining competitive
performance in Factory (30.25 dB) and Pool (36.30 dB),
our approach exhibits strong robustness in both Hard and
Normal scenes. The consistent improvement over baseline
models, such as BAD-GS (e.g., +1.74 dB in Sanatorium),
highlights its enhanced capability in handling complex scene
degradations. This performance underscores the effectiveness
TABLE XI
ANALYSIS OF INTERVAL M NUMBERS IN INITIALIZATION.
M
Hard
Normal
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
5
26.53
.8141
.1411
31.95
.9442
.0424
10
26.81
.8188
.1383
31.92
.9442
.0357
20
26.86
.8222
.1328
31.11
.9463
.0404
40
26.94
.8235
.1355
32.09
.9453
.0406
80
26.73
.8188
.1399
32.00
.9439
.0419
TABLE XII
ANALYSIS OF THE PROPOSED MODULES FOR POSE ESTIMATION. THE
RESULTS ARE IN THE ABSOLUTE TRAJECTORY ERROR METRIC (ATE).
NOTE THAT COLMAP INITIALIZATION IS BASED ON SHARP IMAGES,
WHILE OUR METHOD UTILIZE BLUR IMAGES.
Methods
Before Training
After Training
COLMAP
Ours
Ours w/o event
Ours w/ event
Average
1.7590
0.2742
0.0560
0.0471
Archives
1.1187
0.1459
0.1127
0.0964
Edifice
2.6226
0.0181
0.0292
0.0171
Com. Street
1.1329
0.0949
0.0632
0.0582
Restaurant
1.1627
0.0536
0.0214
0.0111
Sanatorium
2.7585
0.3272
0.1312
0.1192
Town
1.9840
0.7073
0.0203
0.0177
Boulevard
1.6330
0.5720
0.0183
0.0079
of our method in balancing high-quality reconstruction with
strong generalization across diverse environments.
B. Real-World Experiments
For deblurring reconstruction, DeblurSplat demonstrates
superior performance across all tasks, achieving the high-
est PSNR, SSIM, and the lowest LPIPS values in all five
scenarios, as shown in Table VIII. Notably, it significantly
outperforms existing approaches in the challenging Task2,
achieving a PSNR of 29.03 dB (compared to 20.60 dB from

<!-- page 15 -->
15
TABLE XIII
QUANTITATIVE COMPARISONS OF NOVEL VIEW SYNTHESIS (NVS) ACROSS REAL-WORLD SCENES. BEST RESULTS IN BOLD.
Scene Type
Metric
B-NeRF
B-3DGS
UFP-GS
EFN-GS
E2GS
BAD-NeRF
BAD-GS
EDNeRF
Ours
Task1
PSNR↑
18.33
19.96
22.65
22.40
23.64
23.89
24.45
24.44
25.16
SSIM↑
.6921
.7421
.7889
.7815
.7861
.7867
.7883
.7894
.7982
LPIPS↓
.2331
.1775
.1176
.1169
.1006
.0967
.0970
.0971
.0806
Task2
PSNR↑
19.14
20.74
11.98
12.97
14.11
19.41
21.53
21.50
27.98
SSIM↑
.6843
.7339
.4554
.4718
.4492
.5279
.5522
.5538
.7582
LPIPS↓
.2550
.1950
.3736
.3449
.3846
.3365
.3058
.3028
.0591
Task3
PSNR↑
9.240
10.15
21.52
22.19
22.43
22.89
23.37
23.53
25.64
SSIM↑
.3877
.4185
.7068
.7292
.6882
.6913
.6907
.6863
.7814
LPIPS↓
.5203
.4840
.2908
.2651
.2604
.2540
.2485
.2523
.1423
Task4
PSNR↑
13.15
13.37
15.67
18.10
18.53
17.28
18.18
19.19
24.22
SSIM↑
.4638
.4615
.6606
.6952
.6810
.6463
.6613
.6786
.7773
LPIPS↓
.5012
.4859
.2597
.2216
.2317
.2684
.2593
.2325
.1004
Task5
PSNR↑
16.08
19.24
23.10
22.22
24.38
23.94
24.57
24.20
26.69
SSIM↑
.6596
.7440
.8225
.8084
.8273
.8166
.8221
.8168
.8620
LPIPS↓
.4258
.3058
.1029
.1195
.0848
.0867
.0757
.0854
.0486
EDNeRF) and reducing LPIPS by 74.3%, highlighting its
robustness in handling severe motion blur. The consistent im-
provements in Task1 (PSNR: 27.07 dB, +0.76 dB over BAD-
GS) and Task5 (SSIM: 0.8556, +0.0226 over BAD-GS) further
underscore the efficacy of our balanced sampling strategy and
event-guided progressive alignment. Additionally, DeblurSplat
excels in texture recovery, achieving the lowest LPIPS of
0.0923 in Task4, surpassing prior methods by approximately
60%. These results validate the advantages of integrating dense
stereo priors and event streams, effectively mitigating pose
initialization errors and blur-induced geometry misalignment.
Our approach establishes a new state-of-the-art in deblurring
reconstruction.
APPENDIX F
ABLATION STUDY
Optimization Objectives. We explore different λe settings
from Eq. 8 to assess model performance. As shown in Ta-
ble IX, we conclude that event-based guidance and latent
blur simulation are crucial for reconstruction performance in
challenging scenarios when λe ≥5e-1. On the other hand,
setting λe = 5e-2 leads to performance collapse, likely due
to confusion between the event-based prior and the original
blurred images, causing the model to fall into sub-optimal
solutions.
Initialization Efficiency. We analyze the effect of different
initialization interval values (M), as presented in Table XI.
Our findings indicate that setting 5 ≤M ≤20 hinders fine-
grained semantic extraction, while increasing M to 80 overly
prioritizes low-confidence points, many of which lack mean-
ingful information. Finally, we examine the impact of different
sampling quantities on overall optimization. As shown in Table
X, we observe that increasing the sampling quantity during
initialization makes global optimization more challenging,
aligning with findings from previous works [39], [1]. To
further improve the reconstruction performance and robust
deblurring, we set M to 40.
Pose Estimation. As shown in Table XII, we employ the
Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) metric to assess the impact
of different modules on pose estimation. Compared to our pro-
posed approach, COLMAP initialization, which relies on sharp
images, produces significantly higher errors. This is attributed
to its limited robustness when handling blurred images, where
semantic confusion degrades pose estimation accuracy. In
contrast, our method leverages the rich priors encoded in a
dense stereo module pretrained on large-scale sharp datasets,
enabling more accurate camera pose predictions. Furthermore,
the results in Table XII demonstrate that the event-based Pro-
gressive Alignment module effectively refines pose estimation
by implicitly guiding optimization in challenging scenarios,
ultimately contributing to improved deblurring reconstruction.
APPENDIX G
LIMITATION AND FUTURE
Confidence Evaluation. We rely on confidence estimation to
filter point clouds generated by DUSt3R. However, its accu-
racy under ambiguous conditions remains unclear, especially
given that DUSt3R is trained on high-quality, sharp images. A
more rigorous quantitative standard for assessing point cloud
quality is needed to ensure reliable initialization of gaussian
primitives.
Large-Scale Test. The core concept of our approach leverages
the rich knowledge from DUSt3R and event streams to tackle
motion-blur reconstruction. Naturally, this raises the question
of whether the same mechanism can be extended to more com-
plex reconstruction scenarios, such as rolling-shutter effects.
APPENDIX H
MORE VISUALIZATION
Qualitative results are presented in Figure 11, 12, 13 and
14. Our findings indicate that while previous state-of-the-
art methods perform well in normal scenes, they struggle in

<!-- page 16 -->
16
challenging cases like hard scenes, particularly when handling
complex textures and large-scale camera motion, often lead-
ing to severe blurring. In contrast, our method significantly
outperforms these baselines by rendering high-fidelity deblur
views and novel views.

<!-- page 17 -->
17
Pool
Tanabata
Wine
E2GS
Ground Truth
BAD-GS
EDNERF
Ours
Archives
Restaurant
Boulevard
Edifice
(b) Overview of Rendering Novel Views in Normal Scenes 
(a) Overview of Rendering Novel Views in Hard Scenes 
Fig. 11. Qualitative comparison on the remaining synthetic dataset on novel views synthesis. It shows that our method achieves better performance in rendering
novel views compared to the other SOTA methods.

<!-- page 18 -->
18
E2GS
Ground Truth
BAD-GS
EDNERF
Ours
Origin
Factory
Cozyroom
Pool
Tanabata
Wine
Fig. 12.
Qualitative comparison on the normal scenes dataset on deblur views rendering. It shows that our method achieves better performance in deblur
reconstruction compared to the other SOTA methods.

<!-- page 19 -->
19
E2GS
Ground Truth
BAD-GS
EDNERF
Ours
Origin
Sanatorium
Com. Street
Archives
Restaurant
Boulevard
Edifice
Town
Fig. 13.
Qualitative comparison on the hard scenes dataset on deblur views rendering. It shows that our method achieves better performance in deblur
reconstruction compared to the other SOTA methods.

<!-- page 20 -->
20
E2GS
Ground Truth
BAD-GS
EDNERF
Ours
Origin
Task 1
Task 2
Task 3
Task 4
Task 5
Fig. 14. Qualitative comparison on the real-world scenes on deblur views rendering.
