<!-- page 1 -->
GaussianHeadTalk: Wobble-Free 3D Talking Heads with Audio Driven
Gaussian Splatting
Madhav Agarwal1
Mingtian Zhang2
Laura Sevilla-Lara1
Steven McDonagh1
1University of Edinburgh
2University College London
madhav.agarwal@ed.ac.uk,
mingtian.zhang.17@ucl.ac.uk, {l.sevilla,s.mcdonagh}@ed.ac.uk
Ours
Ground Truth
GaussianTalker
TalkinĀGaussian
Input Video 
(Monocular)
3D Gaussian Head Model
Rendered  Lip-Sync Video
Comparison with 
Previous Works
Input 
Audio (Any)
Hello
ÿather
peace
calm
Figure 1. To address the challenges of temporal instability, slow rendering, and limited photorealism in existing methods, we propose
GaussianHeadTalk: a real-time system that generates photorealistic, temporally stable 3D talking head avatars directly from monocular
video and arbitrary audio input. Corresponding output frames generated by state-of-the-art methods GaussianTalker [9] and TalkingGaus-
sian [29] are also provided for visual comparison.
Abstract
Speech-driven talking heads have recently emerged and en-
able interactive avatars. However, real-world applications
are limited, as current methods achieve high visual fidelity
but slow or fast yet temporally unstable. Diffusion methods
provide realistic image generation, yet struggle with one-
shot settings. Gaussian Splatting approaches are real-time,
yet inaccuracies in facial tracking, or inconsistent Gaussian
mappings, lead to unstable outputs and video artifacts that
are detrimental to realistic use cases. We address this prob-
lem by mapping Gaussian Splatting using 3D Morphable
Models to generate person-specific avatars. We introduce
transformer-based prediction of model parameters, directly
from audio, to drive temporal consistency. From monocu-
lar video and independent audio speech inputs, our method
enables generation of real-time talking head videos where
we report competitive quantitative and qualitative perfor-
mance.
Project Page: https://madhav1ag.github.io/gaussianheadtalk
1. Introduction
Generating talking head videos, driven directly by audio,
can be considered a valuable task with multiple practical
applications [2, 7]. Whether in the education sector, health
care, teleconferencing, or film and entertainment industries,
high-quality personalized talking head avatars serve as an
effective path for information transfer. For instance, AI-
driven virtual assistants for telemedicine can be useful in
assistive communications and post-stroke rehabilitation [1].
By providing a human face to an interactive agent, instead
of a text-based input-output platform, the user experience is
made more immersive [59]. Further uses include dubbing
movies into multiple languages, which reduces the produc-
tion time and cost of VFX studios manyfold [6].
The canonical problem involves taking a short input
video of a person, alongside an arbitrary speech audio sig-
nal, in order to create a person-specific avatar that can gen-
erate an output video of the subject appearing to speak
the audio content (i.e. with visual lip-syncing that accu-
rately matches the input audio).
The task is commonly
known as face reenactment and previous solutions involve
1
arXiv:2512.10939v1  [cs.CV]  11 Dec 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
using GANs [3, 24, 43, 50], Diffusion models [8, 51, 54],
NeRFs [20, 23] and, more recently, 3D Gaussian Splat-
ting [9, 10, 29, 39]. Diffusion-based methods have robust
generative priors and produce state-of-the-art image qual-
ity yet they are computationally expensive and inference
speed is typically slower than GANs and NeRFs. In con-
trast, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) methods are person or
scene-specific and have recently shown efficacy in render-
ing high-quality images and videos comparable to that of
diffusion models, but at real-time speeds.
Although recent advancements in 3DGS have suc-
cessfully incorporated temporal information for dynamic
scenes [32, 52], the integration of related techniques into
the synthesis of audio-driven 3DGS talking heads remains
an open challenge. This gap highlights the need for novel
approaches to combine dynamic, temporally consistent fa-
cial animation with audio-driven generation. The task is in-
herently dynamic, requiring precise temporal information
to ensure realistic and consistent facial movements, par-
ticularly lip synchronization. Current audio-driven 3DGS
methods rely on parameter tracking for temporal informa-
tion, which often falls short for monocular videos. Inac-
curacies in such tracking can lead to temporal flickering
(i.e., ‘wobbling’) in the face region, causing visible arti-
facts. Our experiments show that this instability arises due
to the improper utilization of temporal information from an
input video, which manifests itself as either inaccurate 3D
mesh parameter tracking from RGB videos or independent
frame-by-frame generation.
To address this problem, we leverage a transformer ar-
chitecture [48] to process the audio signal in a manner that
can capture long-range semantic information [36, 44, 46].
In tandem, we use the input video to learn a person-specific
style embedding, which can maintain the visual identity of
the speaker. We conjecture that directly mapping an audio
signal to rasterised pixel space is highly challenging due
to its high dimensionality, inherent non-linearity, and the
extensive data required to cover the diverse output distri-
bution of realistic facial appearances. We therefore alter-
natively opt to predict the FLAME [30] parameters for a
template mesh and use them to render the subject head us-
ing 3DGS [39]. Although previous work has explored pre-
dicting 3DMM parameters from audio [19, 53], our novel
architecture uniquely integrates a person-specific style em-
bedding to preserve identity information, alongside direct
FLAME parameter prediction from audio. This direct pre-
diction allows temporal information from the audio to inher-
ently influence and constrain consecutive frame predictions,
significantly enhancing temporal consistency and reducing
‘wobbling’. We transfer the lip movement generated from
our transformer model and head motion from the original
video through an optimized set of FLAME parameters.
One aspect that is widely assessed when judging the
quality of generated videos is that of stability [21, 41]. Intu-
itively: “the videos are stable” is a subjective statement. To
formalize the notion, we propose a stability metric; towards
quantifying video temporal stability (see Sec. 3.3).
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
• We highlight the utility of transformer-based prediction
for person-specific 3D Morphable Model (3DMM) pa-
rameters, from input audio. Our approach enables a tem-
porally consistent mesh-based subject rendering.
• We introduce a metric to quantify the temporal stability
of synthetic talking head avatars.
• Our overall pipeline, coined GaussianHeadTalk, achieves
real-time video rendering, while maintaining competitive
performance across both perceptual quality and video sta-
bility metrics.
2. Related Work
2.1. 2D Talking Head Generation
Image generation and editing capabilities of modern gener-
ative models have inspired many practical applications in-
cluding talking head synthesis. Early 2D-image based talk-
ing head methods ingest a single input image of a person
and use GANs to drive video reenactment [3, 18, 22, 24, 43,
45, 50]. These methods generally make use of an intermedi-
ate representation such as facial keypoints [3, 22, 24, 43, 50]
or latent vectors [18, 45] to map motions to pixel space.
3D Morphable Models (3DMM) [25, 47, 61] also provide
an intermediate representation by mapping a 2D input im-
age to 3D space and then back to 2D, affording control
of head rotation. Imperfect mappings, however, can lead
to a lack of identity preservation in resulting generated
videos. Audio-driven methods [37, 60, 63] focus on achiev-
ing accurate lip-sync, while head motion is generally non-
deterministically learned from the training dataset.
Given the superior generation quality of Diffusion meth-
ods [17], in comparison to GANs, some researchers recently
employed them for face reenactment [8, 51, 54].
These
methods provide better image quality, but inference is slow
and computationally expensive, making them infeasible for
real-time generation. A recent line of works [27, 31] intro-
duce real-time generation, but the use of single input source
images does not provide these models with temporal mo-
tion information. We conjecture that this leads to problems
like unnatural head movement, stiff torso, and output qual-
ity is significantly dependent on identity features such as
teeth and eye appearance within the single source frame.
2D based methods also suffer from a lack of detailed 3D
facial geometry information. This impedes external control
over facial motion and consistency during head rotation.
2

<!-- page 3 -->
2.2. 3D Talking Head Generation
With the advent of 3D rendering techniques such as
NeRFs [34] and Gaussian Splatting [26], researchers have
started to explore these methods to render talking heads.
NeRF-based approaches [20, 23] learn a radiance field from
multiple input images of a single scene. The volumetric
rendering is performed based on an input controlling sig-
nal e.g., audio. AD-NerF [23] has an intertwined archi-
tecture that models the head and torso using two separate
networks, limiting its flexibility. The original NeRF archi-
tecture results in slow rendering speed (<1 FPS on NVIDIA
V100 GPUs [55]), for talking head synthesis [33, 42]. Pro-
trait4D [15] uses multi-view synthetic data to learn tri-
plane representations and, subsequently, Protrait4D-v2 [16]
works on pseudo-multi-view videos.
We note that these
methods cannot perform real-time rendering.
Gaussian Splatting has emerged as an effective real-time
rendering method via Gaussian optimization on input scene
meshes. The input meshes are generated from monocular
or multi-view videos. GaussianAvatar [39] and Gaussian-
Head [49] use parametric models to control head motion.
While the former binds Gaussians on a FLAME [30] mesh,
such that every mesh triangle has at least one Gaussian, the
latter uses a motion deformation field and tri-plane repre-
sentation. To enable motion, these renders can be condi-
tioned directly on audio or driving video
[9, 10, 29] to
create talking heads. GaussianTalker [9] and TalkingGaus-
sian [29] both utilize a tri-plane representation and fuse an
audio signal to predict the deformation offsets in an end-to-
end approach. GaussianSpeech [4] and GaussianTalker [58]
use FLAME [30] as an intermediate representation to map
audio to Gaussians. GaussianSpeech [4] focuses on gener-
ating high-dimensional vertex offsets from audio for multi-
view videos. GaussianTalker [58] predicts fine-grained off-
sets for Gaussian position, rotation, and color to synthesize
details like teeth and wrinkles, however layering this detail-
synthesis network on top of fully audio-generated motion
may risk amplifying any underlying instability from the
motion prediction module. These methods are suitable for
real-time inference due to high rendering speed; however,
we conjecture that independent frame-by-frame generation
and a lack of optimization, using objectives that account
for temporal tracking, have the potential to induce jittering
artifacts. Another line of work directly predicts 3D Mor-
phable Model (3DMM) parameters, such as FLAME [30],
from an audio signal [14, 19, 40, 53]. Their focus is on
controlling facial parameters, rather than handling texture
information, and hence, provide semantically meaningful
motion controls. In this work, we take advantage of an in-
termediate 3DMM representation by mapping audio-to-face
parameters and then render a video using Gaussian Splats
with real-time performance.
3. Methodology
Our method is trained using an identity-specific video V =
{In}, consisting of n image frames. We build our model in
two-stages, where the first stage involves training identity-
specific Gaussian Splatting from the input video V , such
that each Gaussian is optimized with respect to a 3D Mor-
phable Model’s triangles by ensuring that every triangle is
attributed to at least one Gaussian. The first stage of our
pipeline (see Sec. 3.1) builds upon GaussianAvatar [39],
where we replace the original FLAME [30] parameters
with parameters optimized by person-specific avatar train-
ing. In the second stage (Sec. 3.2), we learn an audio to
FLAME [30] mapping, which captures the speech style of
a given identity. We next provide details for each stage.
3.1. Gaussian Head Model
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [26] reconstructs a static
scene in 3D space using images and intrinsic, extrinsic
camera parameters. A scene is represented using a set of
K anisotropic 3D Gaussians, where each Gaussian is de-
fined by a center mean µi ∈R3 and a covariance matrix
Σi ∈R3×3. The density of the i-th Gaussian for a 3D coor-
dinate x ∈R3 is given by:
  \la b el  
{ eq:gaussia
n
} G_i(x) = e^{-\frac {1}{2}(x - \mu _i)^\top \Sigma _i^{-1} (x - \mu _i)}. 
(1)
Further decomposing the covariance matrix for efficient
storage and rendering, we obtain Σ = RSS⊤R⊤where R
is a rotation matrix and S a scaling matrix. By additionally
storing appearance information, a 3D scene can be defined
by a set of 3D Gaussian primitives:
  \la b el { eq: 3Ds cen e} \ma
thc al {G} = \left \{ G_i = (\mu _i, s_i, q_i, \alpha _i, \text {SH}_i) \right \}_{i=1}^K, 
(2)
where µi ∈R3 is the position vector (c.f. Eq. 1), si ∈R3
is the scaling vector, qi ∈R4 is a quaternion representing
orientation, αi ∈R is an opacity value, and SHi denotes a
set of spherical harmonics for encoding color as a function
of view direction.
At rendering time, the 2D pixel-wise color C is calcu-
lated by blending a subset of all 3D Gaussians whose pro-
jection into the image plane overlaps with that pixel loca-
tion. Let N ⊆{1, . . . , K} denote the set of overlapping
Gaussians:
  
\
tex
t {C
}
 = 
\
sum
 _ { i\
in \mathcal {N}} c_i \alpha _i' \prod _{j=1}^{i-1} (1 - \alpha _j'), \label {eq:1} 
(3)
where ci is the view-dependent color of the i-th Gaussian,
and α′
i is the projected 2D opacity of each Gaussian, ob-
tained by multiplying the projection of the overlapping 3D
Gaussian onto the image plane with the original opacity α.
3

<!-- page 4 -->
Figure 2. We introduce GaussianHeadTalk, which comprises of Gaussian Head Modeling and audio to facial motion mapping. We first
generate meshes from an input video using VHAP [38] tracking. Given an input audio and a template mesh, The audio to facial motion
mapping uses a transformer-based architecture with a frozen Wav2Vec 2.0 [5] encoder. It learns long-term audio context and maps it directly
to the 3D mesh by predicting FLAME [30] parameters. The generated parameters are used to render a person-specific GaussianAvatar [39],
trained using the input video.
GaussianAvatar [39] introduce a method to bind Gaus-
sians to Morphable Model mesh triangles, in this case, a
FLAME [30] representation. For a given triangle with ver-
tices and edges, a Gaussian is initialized using the mean po-
sition of the vertices, the direction of one edge, and the nor-
mal vector of the triangle. A process of Gaussian densifica-
tion helps to adjust to an appropriate number of Gaussians,
based on local scene complexity. This involves increasing
or decreasing the number of Gaussians in a given part of
the scene and is achieved by either splitting Gaussians into
two if the view-space positional gradient is large, or cloning
into two if it is small. To avoid density explosion, a pruning
strategy removes points that have very low opacity, while
maintaining at least one splat per triangle.
The stability of the rendering process depends heavily
on the accuracy of the binding between Gaussian splats and
FLAME [30] triangles. In contrast to alternative work, such
as INSTA [65], where bounding volume hierarchy (BVH)
based nearest triangle search [13] leads to flickering arti-
facts, GaussianAvatar [39] is agnostic to tracked mesh inac-
curacies due to back-propagation of a positional gradient for
each triangle. This consistent binding between Gaussians
and the mesh triangles, regardless of pose or expression,
allows fine-tuning of FLAME parameters. Along with the
optimization of Gaussian splats parameters for position and
scaling, FLAME parameters (translation, pose, and expres-
sion) were therefore also optimized during training. This
plays a crucial role in stabilizing the rendering output, miti-
gating misalignment between the triangle meshes and Gaus-
sians. We leverage this Gaussian-based head modeling and
FLAME parameter tuning to help generate stable output.
3.2. Audio to Facial Motion (Audio2Param)
We map from an audio signal to facial motion by leveraging
the FLAME parametric 3D Morphable Model. FLAME dis-
entangled parameters control identity, expression, and pose.
These parameters can then be used to generate an explicit
3D head mesh. Distinct from previous work [19, 53], which
operates directly on full 3D head meshes by predicting tri-
angle deformations or vertex positions, we take advantage
of the disentangled FLAME representation. By directly pre-
dicting FLAME expression parameters, we reduce the com-
plexity of our learning objective from explicitly predicting
the spatial location of thousands of face vertices to the pre-
diction of fewer than one hundred parameters that together
define facial expressions and lip motion.
We design a transformer-based architecture to capture
long-range temporal information from the audio signal con-
cerning the context of the spoken sentence. To mitigate
the lack of diverse 3D audio-video datasets containing ex-
plicit visual data, 3D meshes and paired audio, we instan-
tiate our encoder using Wav2Vec 2.0 [5] which has previ-
ously demonstrated strong representation performance for
audio information [19, 53]. We encode audio signals into
4

<!-- page 5 -->
Method
Self-Reenactment
Cross-Reenactment
FPS↑
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Sync↑
Stability↓
Sync↑
Stability↓
IPLap [62]
29.0412
0.9462
0.0340
3.902
0.6633
3.324
0.6856
3.4
EDTalk [45]
26.9461
0.8626
0.0486
7.144
0.7802
6.982
0.7931
17.2
Ditto [31]
21.0595
0.7412
0.1284
7.023
0.9245
6.844
0.9618
24.2
MimicTalk [56]
23.8775
0.8092
0.0735
5.446
0.8824
5.286
0.9227
12.1
GaussianTalker [9]
27.6079
0.9352
0.0451
5.346
1.7622
5.042
1.8745
59.6
TalkingGaussian [29]
27.3053
0.9335
0.0342
6.422
1.7183
6.146
1.8803
72.2
GaussianHeadTalk
29.1233
0.9477
0.0338
6.528
0.6201
6.122
0.6836
45.4
Table 1. Self-Reenactment and Cross-Reenactment experimental settings. Our method achieves strong results in terms of stability, realism,
image quality and remains competitive for lip-sync.
feature vectors by adding a linear projection layer after the
encoder. Similar to [19], we use a Periodic Positional En-
coding (PPE) to provide temporal information to the trans-
former decoder and a binary alignment mask to avoid infor-
mation leakage from future frames.
For a single identity m, let the input training set be given
by L = {A, M 0:T
gt , Nm}, where M 0:T
gt
is a sequence of
ground-truth meshes for T+1 frames, A is an audio sig-
nal from the ground-truth video that corresponds to those
frames. The neutral template mesh Nm represents the given
identity. Each input training set is generated by processing
an input video consisting of T+1 frames using the VHAP
tracker [39] to generate ground truth meshes M 0:T
gt
and neu-
tral template mesh Nm. Our objective is to predict a se-
quence of meshes M 0:T
pred, given audio and neutral template
mesh, such that:
  f_{ \th e t a }
(A,N _ m ) =
 M ^{0:T}_{pred} \approx M^{0:T}_{gt} \label {eq:objective}. 
(4)
The correlation between the audio signal and lip move-
ment is typically high, but the correlation between the audio
signal and head movement is not [57]. Since different yet
plausible head motions and expressions exist for the same
speech, there is no one-to-one mapping between speech and
head motion. Hence we focus on predicting accurate lip
movement from audio, by checking for high correlation be-
tween audio and lip movement, and transfer head motion
directly from the original tracked video sequence.
In addition to the head motion, the (potentially indepen-
dent) audio speech signal A is processed through the trans-
former encoder and linear projection layer. We denote the
output from the linear projection layer for T+1 frames as
C0:T . For a given frame t, the transformer encoder takes au-
dio for frames [0, . . . , t] and uses the linear projection layer
to generate Ct. The predicted audio features are passed to
the multi-head attention block of the transformer to obtain
the latent vertex offsets O0:T
v
for each frame.
To utilize latent vertex offsets, an identity-specific tem-
plate mesh, which is an average of all meshes obtained
through video tracking, is encoded through a style encoder
network to obtain an identity embedding S. This procedure
is shown in Fig. 2. Predicted latent vertex offsets Oi
v for
frame i are linearly combined with this embedding as:
  
O_ { s v }^
i 
=  S+ O _ v ^ i, \quad i \in \{0, \ldots , T\} \label {eq:mesh_predicted}. 
(5)
The style-conditioned latent embeddings O0:T
sv
are then
processed by a motion decoder, which comprises a set of
linear layers that map them to a low-dimensional FLAME
parameter space, to obtain a 3D mesh representation. By
performing this process for each frame i, we obtain a pre-
dicted mesh sequence M 0:T
pred.
Toward achieving accurate lip motion and jaw movement
prediction, we isolate the FLAME parameters responsible
for jaw movement. We use these to augment the ground-
truth mesh as Mgt′ and calculate a loss as the difference,
in vertex space, between this and our predicted mesh per
frame. The remaining FLAME parameter values, used to
define the ground-truth mesh, are instantiated using the tem-
plate mesh. The model is trained end-to-end using an L2
loss between the ground-truth and predicted meshes in ver-
tex space as follows
  \ma t
h
c
al 
{ L
}
_{m
esh }
 = \ s u
m _{
n=
1
}
^{N} \left ( \sum _{t=1}^{T} \left \| M_{gt'}^t - M_{pred}^t \right \|_2 \right ) \label {eq:vertex_loss}. 
(6)
During inference, the Audio2Param component ingests a
neutral mesh and audio signal in order to predict a sequence
of animated 3D facial meshes using the FLAME parameter
space. The predicted FLAME parameters are used to drive
the motion of a person-specific avatar [39], culminating in
the generation of an audio driven talking head.
3.3. Quantifying temporal consistency
Noted existing work generate talking head videos by posing
video rendering as a set of, per-frame, independent tasks.
We observe that this typically leads to a lack of temporal
consistency in the output, which manifests itself as unnat-
ural wobbling, aberrations, and facial oscillations. Toward
quantifying this problem, we employ a measure of temporal
smoothness for a given video.
5

<!-- page 6 -->
Figure 3. Facial “wobbling” artifacts can be visualized via the
absolute difference between generated and ground-truth frames, in
image-space. The temporal gap between consecutive columns is
ten frames in each case. Our method exhibits smaller and spatially-
more-stable disparities, across time.
Figure 4. Self-Reenactment Results: We show qualitative results
between the Gaussian based methods by reenacting them using
the original audio. Our method, GaussianHeadTalk, shows better
mouth movement, sharper teeth and fewer artifacts.
We first select a video and accompanying audio sample
from the dataset [61] and proceed to render a talking head
video using the original audio signal. This enables a di-
rect comparison between the generated video and the orig-
inal video (ground-truth). Towards defining a robust eval-
uation protocol, we detect and track facial key points [64]
on the nose, as these key points are largely unaffected by
jaw movement and expression changes. The time-domain
signal provided, by these key points, can then be compared
between generated and ground truth video frames. Further,
we observe that high-frequency wobbling and rapid oscilla-
tions are challenging to detect using keypoint comparisons
alone, and thus adopt a hybrid approach by additionally per-
forming a Fast-Fourier-Transform (FFT) analysis to iden-
tify frequent and uneven oscillations.
Our hybrid approach takes an average of mean motion
difference Md, variability in motion magnitude Vm, and
high-frequency power Hf. Each term is normalized by their
respective maximum values across a given sequence of in-
put frames. Our compound stability score is then calculated
by taking the average of these values:
  \text { Stabi l it y  s c or
e
} = \frac {M_{d} + V_{m} + H_{f}}{3} \label {eq:weighted_sum}. 
(7)
4. Experiments
4.1. Experimental Settings
Dataset:
We perform experiments on two datasets: VO-
CASET [14] and HDTF [61]. Both datasets provide videos
and synchronized audio. VOCASET also provides tracked
3D-scans of the faces. We use VOCASET for pre-training
the Audio2Param component, and HDTF for training and
evaluating person-specific gaussian avatars.
Since the
Gaussian Splatting and NeRF-based models require sub-
ject specific training, we select ten subjects from HDTF
that cover a diverse set of identities and have a minimum
of four minutes in video length. All videos were converted
to 25fps to maintain experimental consistency. We synthet-
ically generate 15 audio clips covering five different lan-
guages, with an average duration of seven seconds, using a
text-to-speech model1.
Comparison Baselines:
We compare GaussianHeadTalk
with current state-of-the-art methods.
Two approaches,
GaussianTalker [9] and TalkingGaussian [29], naturally
align with our proposed problem setting as both can be con-
sidered audio-driven Gaussian methods. We also compare
with IP LAP [62] and ED Talk [45] which are GAN based
methods, and Ditto [31] which is a Diffusion based method.
Lastly, we use MimicTalk [56] to evaluate performance of a
related NeRF technique.
Implementation Details:
Our method is built on Py-
Torch.
We first used VOCASET [14] audio-video and
their tracked FLAME [30] parameters. We train our Au-
dio2Param component using ADAM [28] optimizer with a
learning rate of 1e−4. We pre-train for 50000 steps and
all experiments were performed on a single NVIDIA Tesla
A100 GPU (40GB).
4.2. Quantitative Evaluation
We evaluate the performance of our model on two tasks:
self-reenactment and cross-reenactment.
First, for self-
reenactment, we extract the first 30 seconds of a video
as a test set.
We train on the remaining part of the
1https://elevenlabs.io/
6

<!-- page 7 -->
Figure 5. Cross-Reenactment Results: visual reenactment using various methods with audio from a different speaker. The top row shows
the words from the audio, where red text highlights exact phonemes. GaussianHeadTalk can provide improved lip movement for these
audio samples where other methods struggle with lip motion.
video segment.
For cross-reenactment, we use syntheti-
cally generated audio from a text-to-speech model so that
the audio sample contains no information about the trained
person identity.
We compare our method with state-of-
the-art Gaussian Splatting [9, 29], GAN
[45, 62], Dif-
fusion [31] and NeRF [56] based methods.
To evalu-
ate self-reenactment, we use Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM), and
Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS). We
calculate the Sync confidence score [11, 12] for both self-
reenactment and cross-reenactment. We observe that our
method predominantly improves upon the state-of-the-art
(ref. Table 1). For the perceptual metric GaussianHeadTalk
performs better than NeRF and alternative Gaussian based
methods. IPLap [62] provides results comparable to ours,
as it models only the lip region using a GAN-based archi-
tecture. However, inference is somewhat slower, which may
impede its real-time applications (ref. Table 1).
4.3. Qualitative Evaluation
We show visual results in Figure 4 and Figure 5 for quali-
tative comparison. GAN based methods provide good lip-
sync in both cases, but their image quality falls short; with
generated videos of resolution up to 256 × 256. Gaussian-
based methods (GaussianTalker, TalkingGaussian) generate
sharper images, but their lip sync scores are low. As ex-
ample, they show lower lip openness while speaking ‘Hey’,
(see middle column of Fig. 5). They also display wobbling
artifacts in the generated videos, mainly due to the lack of
long-term temporal information and improper tracking of
3D parameters during training. Our method generates sta-
ble talking head videos, with qualitative results that concur
with the relative quantitative metric improvements. We pro-
vide supplementary videos for further results visualization.
4.4. User Study
We conduct a user study to investigate how generated video
quality is perceived by humans. We select a group of thirty
7

<!-- page 8 -->
individuals and present each survey participant with mul-
tiple video triplets. Our study compares the performance
of GaussianTalker [9], TalkingGausian [29] and our work.
Participants were asked to evaluate videos in terms of “natu-
ralness” (i.e. assess wobbling and artifacts), lip sync quality,
and image quality (i.e. evaluate identity preservation in gen-
erated videos). Generated video orderings were random-
ized and models responsible for generation were masked
from participants. Each participant was shown ten sets of
video triplets, each with an average duration of five sec-
onds. Participants were asked to provide an ordinal ranking
for each triplet, for each assessed aspect: ‘Best’, ‘Average’,
and ‘Worst’, which we numerically map to values 3, 2, and
1, respectively. For each participant, we sum the ratings a
method received across the 10 triplets, and then divided this
sum by 3 to normalize the score into a range of 3.3–10. The
final reported scores, for each method, are average normal-
ized scores across all thirty participants (Table 2).
Method
Natural↑
LipSync↑
Quality↑
GaussianTalker [9]
4.0
5.0
4.0
TalkingGaussian [29]
6.2
7.2
6.5
GaussianHeadTalk (ours)
9.8
7.8
9.5
Table 2. User Study assessing human visual perception of gener-
ated video quality. The scores are averaged over different partici-
pants, with ten being the maximum.
All participants ranked videos generated by our method
as the most natural, which supports our improved video sta-
bility claims. In terms of ‘LipSync’, our method scores
slightly above TalkingGaussian, which correlates with the
related ‘Sync’ score (Table 1). Performant lip sync quality
may be explained by the special focus on the lip region, in
both cases. Image quality for our method can also show im-
proved human rating scores, with respect to the compared
state-of-the-art.
4.5. Ablation Study
We perform ablative studies to evaluate our methodological
choices (see Table 3). We first explore the effect of using
non-person-specific (i.e. non-optimized) FLAME parame-
ters directly for rendering (“w/o Parameter Optimization”).
Resulting generated videos display artifacts around various
parts of the face which arise due to inaccuracies in parame-
ter alignment, distorting the videos generated.
We also tested the effect of more restrictive motion
transfer; namely, transferring only the lip motion (FLAME
model jaw parameters) and keeping the head motion static
(“w/o Full Motion Transfer”). This strategy leads to arti-
facts around parts of the generated video, due to the move-
ment interdependence between distinct FLAME parame-
ters. We observe smoother video generation, with fewer
artifacts, when we transfer the full set of FLAME parame-
ters (remaining pose and expression components) from the
original video.
Method
PSNR↑
Sync↑
Stability↓
w/o Parameter Optimization
27.6987
6.5123
1.1432
w/o Full Motion Transfer
23.5621
6.4962
0.9154
GaussianHeadTalk (ours)
29.1233
6.528
0.6201
Table 3. Ablation study: removal of key method components re-
sults in qualitative visual degradations and respective decreases in
associated metrics.
5. Limitations and Discussion
Our method can generate high-quality talking heads, but
is restricted to exactly this part of the body and currently
cannot render partial or full human bodies. This limitation
arises due to our usage of a head-specific parametric model.
Extension to accommodate full-body reenactment might in-
volve designing a Gaussian Splatting model that binds to
SMPL-X [35], or similar full-body 3D parametric models.
We conjecture that a further interesting line of future work
will involve exploring any benefits derivable from learning
facial expression changes based on the tone and speed of
the audio signal, or other external control parameters for
changing the emotions of the face.
6. Ethical Consideration
The generation of photo-realistic talking heads is a tech-
nology that carries potential risks of misuse, particularly in
the creation of deepfakes for misinformation, harassment,
or identity fraud. We advocate for the incorporation of ro-
bust watermarking and detection mechanisms to help dis-
tinguish synthetic content from real media and reduce the
potential for harmful misuse.
7. Conclusion
We introduce a novel method for generating high-quality
3D talking heads with lip sync in real time. We proposed a
temporally stable pipeline that uses transformers to capture
sematic information and long-range dependencies from au-
dio signals. We also introduce a stability metric to quantify
perceptual wobbling in generated videos. Our method of-
fers strong performance with respect to the existing state-of-
the-art in terms of qualitative and quantitative benchmarks
and we believe that high-quality real-time facial reenact-
ment holds exciting potential for many practical and useful
real-time applications.
8

<!-- page 9 -->
References
[1] Ayesha Afridi, Sumaiyah Obaid, Neha Raheel, and Fa-
rooq Azam Rathore.
Integrating artificial intelligence in
stroke rehabilitation: Current trends and future directions;
a mini review. JPMA. The Journal of the Pakistan Medical
Association, 75(2):445–447, 2025. 1
[2] Madhav Agarwal, Anchit Gupta, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay,
Vinay P Namboodiri, and CV Jawahar. Compressing video
calls using synthetic talking heads. In British Machine Vision
Conference (BMVC), 2022. 1
[3] Madhav Agarwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay P. Nam-
boodiri, and C. V. Jawahar. Audio-visual face reenactment.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Ap-
plications of Computer Vision (WACV), pages 5178–5187,
2023. 2
[4] Shivangi Aneja, Artem Sevastopolsky, Tobias Kirschstein,
Justus Thies, Angela Dai, and Matthias Nießner.
Gaus-
sianspeech: Audio-driven gaussian avatars. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.18675, 2024. 3
[5] Alexei Baevski, Yuhao Zhou, Abdelrahman Mohamed, and
Michael Auli. wav2vec 2.0: A framework for self-supervised
learning of speech representations. Advances in neural infor-
mation processing systems, 33:12449–12460, 2020. 4
[6] Dan Bigioi and Peter Corcoran.
Multilingual video dub-
bing—a technology review and current challenges. Frontiers
in signal processing, 3:1230755, 2023. 1
[7] Bolin Chen, Jie Chen, Shiqi Wang, and Yan Ye. Generative
face video coding techniques and standardization efforts: A
review. In 2024 Data Compression Conference (DCC), pages
103–112, 2024. 1
[8] Zhiyuan Chen, Jiajiong Cao, Zhiquan Chen, Yuming Li,
and Chenguang Ma. Echomimic: Lifelike audio-driven por-
trait animations through editable landmark conditions. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.08136, 2024. 2
[9] Kyusun Cho, Joungbin Lee, Heeji Yoon, Yeobin Hong,
Jaehoon Ko, Sangjun Ahn, and Seungryong Kim.
Gaus-
siantalker: Real-time talking head synthesis with 3d gaus-
sian splatting. In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, page 10985–10994, 2024. 1, 2,
3, 5, 6, 7, 8
[10] Xuangeng Chu and Tatsuya Harada. Generalizable and an-
imatable gaussian head avatar.
In The Thirty-eighth An-
nual Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
2024. 2, 3
[11] Joon Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman. Out of time: auto-
mated lip sync in the wild. In Computer Vision–ACCV 2016
Workshops: ACCV 2016 International Workshops, Taipei,
Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers,
Part II 13, pages 251–263. Springer, 2017. 7
[12] Joon Son Chung and Andrew Zisserman. Lip reading in the
wild.
In Computer Vision–ACCV 2016: 13th Asian Con-
ference on Computer Vision, Taipei, Taiwan, November 20-
24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers, Part II 13, pages 87–103.
Springer, 2017. 7
[13] James H Clark. Hierarchical geometric models for visible
surface algorithms. Communications of the ACM, 19(10):
547–554, 1976. 4
[14] Daniel Cudeiro, Timo Bolkart, Cassidy Laidlaw, Anurag
Ranjan, and Michael Black. Capture, learning, and synthesis
of 3D speaking styles. In Proceedings IEEE Conf. on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 10101–
10111, 2019. 3, 6
[15] Yu Deng, Duomin Wang, Xiaohang Ren, Xingyu Chen, and
Baoyuan Wang.
Portrait4d: Learning one-shot 4d head
avatar synthesis using synthetic data.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 7119–7130, 2024. 3
[16] Yu Deng, Duomin Wang, and Baoyuan Wang. Portrait4d-v2:
Pseudo multi-view data creates better 4d head synthesizer.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13570, 2024. 3
[17] Prafulla Dhariwal and Alexander Nichol. Diffusion models
beat gans on image synthesis. Advances in neural informa-
tion processing systems, 34:8780–8794, 2021. 2
[18] Nikita Drobyshev, Antoni Bigata Casademunt, Konstantinos
Vougioukas, Zoe Landgraf, Stavros Petridis, and Maja Pan-
tic. Emoportraits: Emotion-enhanced multimodal one-shot
head avatars. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8498–
8507, 2024. 2
[19] Yingruo Fan, Zhaojiang Lin, Jun Saito, Wenping Wang, and
Taku Komura. Faceformer: Speech-driven 3d facial anima-
tion with transformers.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2022. 2, 3, 4, 5
[20] Guy Gafni, Justus Thies, Michael Zollh¨ofer, and Matthias
Nießner. Dynamic neural radiance fields for monocular 4d
facial avatar reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 8649–8658, 2021. 2, 3
[21] Wilko Guilluy, Laurent Oudre, and Azeddine Beghdadi.
Video stabilization:
Overview, challenges and perspec-
tives. Signal Processing: Image Communication, 90:116015,
2021. 2
[22] Jianzhu Guo, Dingyun Zhang, Xiaoqiang Liu, Zhizhou
Zhong, Yuan Zhang, Pengfei Wan, and Di Zhang. Livepor-
trait: Efficient portrait animation with stitching and retarget-
ing control. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03168, 2024. 2
[23] Yudong Guo, Keyu Chen, Sen Liang, Yongjin Liu, Hujun
Bao, and Juyong Zhang. Ad-nerf: Audio driven neural ra-
diance fields for talking head synthesis. In IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021. 2,
3
[24] Fa-Ting Hong, Longhao Zhang, Li Shen, and Dan Xu.
Depth-aware generative adversarial network for talking head
video generation. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022. 2
[25] Xinya Ji,
Hang Zhou,
Kaisiyuan Wang,
Wayne Wu,
Chen Change Loy, Xun Cao, and Feng Xu. Audio-driven
emotional video portraits. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 14080–14089, 2021. 2
[26] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph., 42(4):139–1,
2023. 3
9

<!-- page 10 -->
[27] Seyeon Kim, Siyoon Jin, Jihye Park, Kihong Kim, Jiyoung
Kim, Jisu Nam, and Seungryong Kim. Moditalker: Motion-
disentangled diffusion model for high-fidelity talking head
generation. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Arti-
ficial Intelligence, pages 4302–4310, 2025. 2
[28] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014. 6
[29] Jiahe Li, Jiawei Zhang, Xiao Bai, Jin Zheng, Xin Ning, Jun
Zhou, and Lin Gu. Talkinggaussian: Structure-persistent 3d
talking head synthesis via gaussian splatting. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 127–145. Springer,
2024. 1, 2, 3, 5, 6, 7, 8
[30] Tianye Li, Timo Bolkart, Michael. J. Black, Hao Li, and
Javier Romero. Learning a model of facial shape and ex-
pression from 4D scans. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
(Proc. SIGGRAPH Asia), 36(6):194:1–194:17, 2017. 2, 3, 4,
6
[31] Tianqi Li, Ruobing Zheng, Minghui Yang, Jingdong Chen,
and Ming Yang.
Ditto: Motion-space diffusion for con-
trollable realtime talking head synthesis.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.19509, 2024. 2, 5, 6, 7
[32] Zhan Li, Zhang Chen, Zhong Li, and Yi Xu. Spacetime gaus-
sian feature splatting for real-time dynamic view synthesis.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8508–8520, 2024. 2
[33] Xian Liu, Yinghao Xu, Qianyi Wu, Hang Zhou, Wayne
Wu, and Bolei Zhou. Semantic-aware implicit neural audio-
driven video portrait generation. In European conference on
computer vision, pages 106–125. Springer, 2022. 3
[34] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021.
3
[35] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani,
Timo Bolkart, Ahmed A. A. Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and
Michael J. Black. Expressive body capture: 3D hands, face,
and body from a single image. In Proceedings IEEE Conf.
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
10975–10985, 2019. 8
[36] Ziqiao Peng, Yihao Luo, Yue Shi, Hao Xu, Xiangyu Zhu,
Hongyan Liu, Jun He, and Zhaoxin Fan. Selftalk: A self-
supervised commutative training diagram to comprehend 3d
talking faces. In Proceedings of the 31st ACM International
Conference on Multimedia, pages 5292–5301, 2023. 2
[37] K R Prajwal, Rudrabha Mukhopadhyay, Vinay P. Nambood-
iri, and C.V. Jawahar.
A lip sync expert is all you need
for speech to lip generation in the wild. In Proceedings of
the 28th ACM International Conference on Multimedia, page
484–492, New York, NY, USA, 2020. Association for Com-
puting Machinery. 2
[38] Shenhan Qian. Vhap: Versatile head alignment with adaptive
appearance priors, 2024. 4
[39] Shenhan Qian, Tobias Kirschstein, Liam Schoneveld, Davide
Davoli, Simon Giebenhain, and Matthias Nießner.
Gaus-
sianavatars: Photorealistic head avatars with rigged 3d gaus-
sians. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 20299–20309,
2024. 2, 3, 4, 5
[40] Alexander Richard, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Yandong Wen, Fer-
nando de la Torre, and Yaser Sheikh. Meshtalk: 3d face an-
imation from speech using cross-modality disentanglement.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 1173–1182, 2021. 3
[41] Marcos Roberto e Souza, Helena de Almeida Maia, and He-
lio Pedrini. Survey on digital video stabilization: concepts,
methods, and challenges. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
55(3):1–37, 2022. 2
[42] Shuai Shen, Wanhua Li, Zheng Zhu, Yueqi Duan, Jie Zhou,
and Jiwen Lu. Learning dynamic facial radiance fields for
few-shot talking head synthesis. In European conference on
computer vision, pages 666–682. Springer, 2022. 3
[43] Aliaksandr Siarohin, St´ephane Lathuili`ere, Sergey Tulyakov,
Elisa Ricci, and Nicu Sebe. First order motion model for
image animation. In Conference on Neural Information Pro-
cessing Systems (NeurIPS), 2019. 2
[44] Wenfeng Song, Xuan Wang, Shi Zheng, Shuai Li, Aimin
Hao, and Xia Hou. Talkingstyle: personalized speech-driven
3d facial animation with style preservation. IEEE Transac-
tions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2024. 2
[45] Shuai Tan, Bin Ji, Mengxiao Bi, and Ye Pan. Edtalk: Effi-
cient disentanglement for emotional talking head synthesis.
In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 398–
416. Springer, 2025. 2, 5, 6, 7
[46] Balamurugan Thambiraja, Ikhsanul Habibie, Sadegh Aliak-
barian, Darren Cosker, Christian Theobalt, and Justus Thies.
Imitator: Personalized speech-driven 3d facial animation. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision, pages 20621–20631, 2023. 2
[47] Justus Thies, Mohamed Elgharib, Ayush Tewari, Christian
Theobalt, and Matthias Nießner.
Neural voice puppetry:
Audio-driven facial reenactment. In Computer Vision–ECCV
2020: 16th European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August
23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVI 16, pages 716–731.
Springer, 2020. 2
[48] Ashish Vaswani, Noam Shazeer, Niki Parmar, Jakob Uszko-
reit, Llion Jones, Aidan N Gomez, Łukasz Kaiser, and Illia
Polosukhin. Attention is all you need. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 30, 2017. 2
[49] Jie Wang, Jiu-Cheng Xie, Xianyan Li, Feng Xu, Chi-Man
Pun, and Hao Gao.
Gaussianhead:
High-fidelity head
avatars with learnable gaussian derivation.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.01632, 2023. 3
[50] Ting-Chun Wang, Arun Mallya, and Ming-Yu Liu. One-shot
free-view neural talking-head synthesis for video conferenc-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021. 2
[51] Huawei Wei, Zejun Yang, and Zhisheng Wang. Aniportrait:
Audio-driven synthesis of photorealistic portrait animation.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17694, 2024. 2
[52] Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng
Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang.
4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering.
10

<!-- page 11 -->
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition, pages 20310–20320, 2024. 2
[53] Jinbo Xing, Menghan Xia, Yuechen Zhang, Xiaodong Cun,
Jue Wang, and Tien-Tsin Wong. Codetalker: Speech-driven
3d facial animation with discrete motion prior. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 12780–12790, 2023. 2, 3, 4
[54] Mingwang Xu, Hui Li, Qingkun Su, Hanlin Shang, Liwei
Zhang, Ce Liu, Jingdong Wang, Yao Yao, and Siyu Zhu.
Hallo: Hierarchical audio-driven visual synthesis for portrait
image animation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08801, 2024. 2
[55] Xinkai Yan, Jieting Xu, Yuchi Huo, and Hujun Bao. Neural
rendering and its hardware acceleration: A review. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2402.00028, 2024. 3
[56] Zhenhui Ye, Tianyun Zhong, Yi Ren, Ziyue Jiang, Jiawei
Huang, Rongjie Huang, Jinglin Liu, Jinzheng He, Chen
Zhang, Zehan Wang, et al. Mimictalk: Mimicking a per-
sonalized and expressive 3d talking face in minutes.
Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems, 37:1829–
1853, 2024. 5, 6, 7
[57] Hani Yehia, Philip Rubin, and Eric Vatikiotis-Bateson.
Quantitative association of vocal-tract and facial behavior.
Speech Communication, 26(1-2):23–43, 1998. 5
[58] Hongyun Yu, Zhan Qu, Qihang Yu, Jianchuan Chen,
Zhonghua Jiang, Zhiwen Chen, Shengyu Zhang, Jimin Xu,
Fei Wu, Chengfei Lv, et al. Gaussiantalker: Speaker-specific
talking head synthesis via 3d gaussian splatting. In Proceed-
ings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multime-
dia, pages 3548–3557, 2024. 3
[59] Lichao Zhang, Jia Yu, Shuai Zhang, Long Li, Yangyang
Zhong, Guanbao Liang, Yuming Yan, Qing Ma, Fangsheng
Weng, Fayu Pan, Jing Li, Renjun Xu, and Zhenzhong Lan.
Unveiling the impact of multi-modal interactions on user en-
gagement: A comprehensive evaluation in ai-driven conver-
sations, 2024. 1
[60] Yue Zhang, Minhao Liu, Zhaokang Chen, Bin Wu, Yubin
Zeng, Chao Zhan, Yingjie He, Junxin Huang, and Wenjiang
Zhou. Musetalk: Real-time high quality lip synchorization
with latent space inpainting. arxiv, 2024. 2
[61] Zhimeng Zhang, Lincheng Li, Yu Ding, and Changjie
Fan.
Flow-guided one-shot talking face generation with
a high-resolution audio-visual dataset.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 3661–3670, 2021. 2, 6
[62] Weizhi Zhong, Chaowei Fang, Yinqi Cai, Pengxu Wei,
Gangming Zhao, Liang Lin, and Guanbin Li.
Identity-
preserving talking face generation with landmark and ap-
pearance priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 9729–9738, 2023. 5, 6, 7
[63] Yang Zhou, Xintong Han, Eli Shechtman, Jose Echevar-
ria, Evangelos Kalogerakis, and Dingzeyu Li. Makelttalk:
speaker-aware talking-head animation. ACM Transactions
On Graphics (TOG), 39(6):1–15, 2020. 2
[64] Zhenglin Zhou, Huaxia Li, Hong Liu, Nanyang Wang, Gang
Yu, and Rongrong Ji.
Star loss: Reducing semantic am-
biguity in facial landmark detection.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 15475–15484, 2023. 6
[65] Wojciech Zielonka, Timo Bolkart, and Justus Thies. Instant
volumetric head avatars. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 4574–4584, 2023. 4
11

<!-- page 12 -->
GaussianHeadTalk: Wobble-Free 3D Talking Heads with Audio Driven
Gaussian Splatting
Supplementary Material
Figure A. For a given audio signal, GaussianHeadTalk generates
a lip-sync 3D mesh and use the generated FLAME parameters to
transfer lip motion on a trained GaussianAvatar with optimized
FLAME parameters.
A. Qualitative Ablation Study
Figure B. Ablation Study: Effect of transferring the lip motion
and keeping other parameters static (w/o Full Motion Transfer).
The results shows visible artifacts in the generated avatar, as the
FLAME parameters are not fully independent.
Figure C. Ablation Study: Using Non-Optimized FLAME param-
eters (w/o Parameter Optimization). This leads to artifacts around
the torso region, and wobbling issues.
B. Temporal Analysis of Keypoints
Figure D. Comparison of keypoint movement across time between
an original video and a video generated using GaussianTalker. The
overlay graph shows that there is flickering in the rendered video.
In ideal case, these two graphs should be perfectly overlapping.
We report x-axis, y-axis motion magnitude over time in upper and
lower plots, respectively.
C. User Study
1

<!-- page 13 -->
Category
Method
Final Score
‘Best’ (3)
‘Average’ (2)
‘Worst’ (1)
Total Ratings
Naturalness
GaussianHeadTalk (ours)
9.8
284
14
2
300
TalkingGaussian [29]
6.2
40
178
82
300
GaussianTalker [9]
4.0
5
50
245
300
LipSync
GaussianHeadTalk (ours)
7.8
142
118
40
300
TalkingGaussian [29]
7.2
128
92
80
300
GaussianTalker [9]
5.0
25
100
175
300
Quality
GaussianHeadTalk (ours)
9.5
260
35
5
300
TalkingGaussian [29]
6.5
80
125
95
300
GaussianTalker [9]
4.0
1
58
241
300
Table A. Detailed breakdown of User Study Ratings. 30 participants evaluate 10 videos of each method, generating 300 ratings in total.
For each triplet, a participant assigns the ranks 1, 2, and 3 once each, so the raw sum across the three methods is 1+2+3=6. Over 10 triplets,
this gives a total of 10×6=60. After dividing each method’s total by 3 for normalization, the overall sum across all methods is fixed at 60/3
= 20.
Figure E. Visualization of frame stability through color channel overlay with ground-truth video over 10 consecutive frames. The signifi-
cant displacement (wobbling) observed in the GaussianTalker and TalkingGaussian methods contrasts with the high overlap and stability
achieved by our proposed method. Green and red channels highlight the differences within the blue dashed boxes.
2

<!-- page 14 -->
Figure F. Cross-Reenactment Results: We show the visual results by reenacting various methods using a different audio, from a different
speaker. The top row shows the word from the audio, with red part highlighting the exact phoneme. GaussianHeadTalk provides the best
possible lip movement for these new audio samples. Other methods struggle to have proper lip motion, generate high-quality videos and
no artifacts.
3

<!-- page 15 -->
Figure G. Cross-Reenactment Results: We show the visual results by reenacting various methods using a different audio, from a different
speaker. The top row shows the word from the audio, with red part highlighting the exact phoneme. GaussianHeadTalk provides the best
possible lip movement for these new audio samples. Other methods struggle to have proper lip motion, generate high-quality videos and
no artifacts.
4
