# Towards Efficient 3D Gaussian Human Avatar Compression: A Prior-Guided Framework

Shanzhi Yin1, Bolin Chen2,3,4, Xinju Wu1, Ru-Ling Liao2, Jie Chen2,3, Shiqi Wang1 and Yan Ye2

1City University of Hong Kong 2DAMO Academy, Alibaba Group 3 HuPan Laboratory 4 Fudan University

## Abstract

This paper proposes an efficient 3D avatar coding framework that leverages compact human priors and canonical-to-target transformation to enable high-quality 3D human avatar video compression at ultra-low bit rates. The framework begins by training a canonical Gaussian avatar using articulated splatting in a network-free manner, which serves as the foundation for avatar appearance modeling. Simultaneously, a human-prior template is employed to capture temporal body movements through compact parametric representations. This decomposition of appearance and temporal evolution minimizes redundancy, enabling efficient compression: the canonical avatar is shared across the sequence, requiring compression only once, while the temporal parameters, consisting of just 94 parameters per frame, are transmitted with minimal bit-rate. For each frame, the target human avatar is generated by deforming canonical avatar via Linear Blend Skinning transformation, facilitating temporalcoherent video reconstruction and novel view synthesis. Experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method significantly outperforms conventional 2D/3D codecs and existing learnable dynamic 3D Gaussian splatting compression method in terms of rate-distortion performance on mainstream multi-view human video datasets, paving the way for seamless immersive multimedia experiences in meta-verse applications.

## Introduction

The emerging immersive multi-media applications like meta-verse and mixed-reality demand efficient storage and transmission of human-centered volumetric videos. Unlike 2D human videos [1], volumetric videos integrate temporal scene dynamics, depth information, and multi-viewpoint perspectives, resulting in an exponential increase in data volume. Meanwhile, the modeling of 3D human avatars can be realized by diverse formats, such as mesh or point cloud, which is not compatible with mainstream video coding standards like High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) [2] and Versatile Video Coding (VVC) [3]. Furthermore, recent advancements in 3D vision technologies have shifted the paradigm of human avatar modeling from traditional graphics-based methods, such as Shape Completion and Animation for PEople (SCAPE) [4] and Skinned Multi-Person Linear model (SMPL) [5], to neural-based approaches. Notably, implicit neural representations, such as occupancy fields [6] and Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [7], have become prevalent for modeling volumetric videos. However, the Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) architectures employed in these methods often result in a large number of network parameters, leading to high storage demands and substantial computational costs for training and rendering [8].

In contrast, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [9] explicitly optimizes the attributes of 3D Gaussians and employs splatted projection with α-blending for rendering, providing a more efficient alternative to implicit methods. Consequently, a growing body of work has demonstrated the effectiveness of 3DGS for human avatar modeling. For instance, Animatable 3D Gaussian [10] maps sampled points on a skinned 3DGS human to a colored canonical space, then deforms the canonical avatar to a posed space using rigid transformations derived from target bone configurations. Similarly, 3D-GS Avatar [11] integrates both rigid and non-rigid transformations with view-dependent color mapping, while GauHuman [12] achieves real-time rendering through linear blend skinning (LBS) pose transformations and network-based refinements. GaussianAvatar [13] further enhances rendering quality by predicting 3DGS attributes from pose and appearance features. However, these approaches do not address the compression of 3DGS-based human avatars, which requires both efficient appearance storage and compact temporal representation. In parallel, recent advances in 3DGS compression [8, 14] have shown promising results in reducing storage requirements for 3DGS scenes through techniques such as pruning [15], inter-gaussian prediction [16], rate-distortion optimization [17], vector quantization [18], and 3D-to-2D projection [19]. Nevertheless, these methods are not tailored to human avatars and fail to leverage domain-specific priors to enhance compression efficiency.

In this paper, we make the first attempt to propose an efficient human-priorguided 3D Gaussian avatar compression framework that enables ultra-low bit-rate transmission of 3DGS avatar videos while achieving high-quality reconstruction and novel-view rendering. In particular, network-free 3D Gaussian avatar representation is adopted to rely solely on gaussian attributes for appearance modeling. It eliminates the need for identity-dependent calibration or refinement networks, thereby reducing additional bit-rate consumption. Furthermore, a parametric human model serves as the human-prior to enable efficient temporal representations, allowing avatar body movements to be controlled with highly compact parameters. Finally, a canonicalto-target transformation with articulated Gaussian splatting employs Linear Blend Skinning (LBS) transformations to derive target avatars and provides a unified canonical avatar that can be efficiently compressed using off-the-shelf 3DGS codecs. The main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows,

• We design a domain-specific 3DGS compression framework for human avatar, which decompose volumetric human videos into canonical 3DGS avatars and compact temporal human-prior parameters.

• We develop network-free canonical 3DGS avatar representations and employ LBS transform to derive target 3DGS avatar, significantly enhancing the efficiency of both appearance and temporal representations.

• We compare the proposed method against both conventional 2D/3D codecs as well as learning-based dynamic 3DGS compression method on ZJU-MoCap [20] and MonoCap [21] datasets, demonstrating superior rate-distortion performances and high-quality multi-view rendering.

<!-- image-->  
Figure 1: The detailed structure of proposed human-prior-guided efficient 3D gaussian human avatar compression framework.

## The Proposed Efficient 3DGS Human Avatar Coding Framework

## 2.1 Overall Framework

The detailed structure of proposed framework is shown in Fig. 1. At the encoder side, a canonical 3D gaussian avatar is trained with multi-view videos. Following [12], the 3D gaussian is initialized with human-prior-based vertices instead of Structure-from-Motion [22], which can accelerate convergence and improve rendering quality. The trained canonical avatar is shared across all frames in the avatar sequence, and adopts a “star-shaped pose”, which is characterized by maximally extended limbs, with arms and legs spread outward to form a symmetrical, star-like silhouette. The canonical avatar is then represented as a standard 3DGS with attributes including position, scale, rotation, opacity and spherical harmonics (SH), which can be compressed by off-the-shelf conventional codecs [23]. To model temporal body movements, a humanprior model such as SMPL [5] or SMPL-X [24] is utilized to extract target human parameters at each timestamp, including pose, shape, rotation, and translation. Finally, the human parameters are coded by arithmetic coding such as Context Adaptive Binary Arithmetic Coding (CABAC).

At the decoder side, the canonical 3DGS avatar and target human parameters are decoded by conventional codecs and arithmetic decoding, respectively. Then, the transformation matrices and translation vectors can be derived from target human parameters by combining the corresponding parameters from each skeleton joints. Accordingly, canonical-to-target transformation is then performed to deform the canonical avatar to the target avatar. Specifically, the position of each 3DGS is transformed using LBS algorithm and each 3D Gaussian is reshaped by adjusting its covariance matrix based on the rotation matrix derived from the LBS transformations. Finally, the target avatar is rendered to reconstruct multi-view videos as well as enable novelview synthesis.

## 2.2 Human-prior-based Temporal Modeling

To track temporal pose changes of the human avatar, a human-prior model is employed to define canonical human parameters and extract target human parameters from each frame. We denote the human-prior model as M, and the pose parameter

and shape parameter of canonical and target human are represented as $\pmb { \theta } _ { c } , \pmb { \theta } _ { t }$ and $\beta _ { c } , \beta _ { t }$ , respectively. The canonical human is then defined as:

$$
\mathbf { p } _ { c } , \mathbf { J } _ { c } = M ( \pmb \theta _ { c } , \beta _ { c } ) ,\tag{1}
$$

where $\mathbf { p } _ { c }$ represents the canonical vertex positions and $\mathbf { J } _ { c }$ denotes the corresponding joint locations. Similarly, the target human can be obtained by

$$
\mathbf { p } _ { t } , \mathbf { J } _ { t } = M ( \pmb \theta _ { t } , \beta _ { t } ) ,\tag{2}
$$

where $\mathbf { p } _ { t }$ represents the target vertex positions and $\mathbf { J } _ { t }$ denotes the corresponding joint locations. To get the world-coordinate-based vertex positions $\overline { { \mathbf { p } } } _ { t }$ , the global rotation matrix $\mathbf { R } _ { t }$ and translation vector $\mathbf { T } _ { t }$ should be applied as,

$$
\overline { { \mathbf { p } } } _ { t } = \mathbf { p } _ { t } \mathbf { R } _ { t } ^ { T } + \mathbf { T } _ { t } .\tag{3}
$$

By sharing a unified canonical pose and shape across all avatar sequences, only the target pose parameters $\theta _ { t }$ , shape parameters $\beta _ { t }$ , and global rotation $\mathbf { R } _ { t }$ and translation $\mathbf { T } _ { t }$ need to be transmitted at the encoder side, significantly reducing temporal redundancy for avatar movements and enabling ultra-low bit-rate compression of human avatar sequences. In practice, SMPL [5] is employed as the human-prior model, utilizing 72 pose parameters $\left( \pmb \theta _ { t } \right)$ , 10 shape parameters $( \beta _ { t } )$ , a $3 \times 3$ global rotation matrix $\left( \mathbf { R } _ { t } \right)$ , and a $1 \times 3$ global translation vector $\left( \mathbf { T } _ { t } \right)$ , resulting in a total of 94 parameters per frame, which can be decoded by arithmetic coding and transmitted to decoder side.

## 2.3 Canonical-to-Target Transformation

To fully leverage human-prior representations and accurately recover the target avatar in each frame, inspired by GauHuman [12], an LBS-based canonical-to-target transformation is employed to deform both the positions and shapes of gaussians, which can be derived from pose and shape parameters of human-prior model. Specifically, at the decoder side, the target human parameters are decoded as $\hat { \pmb { \theta } } _ { t } , \hat { \beta } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { R } } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { T } } _ { t }$ , and $\hat { J } _ { t }$ can be derived by human prior model. Then, the translation matrix A from canonical to target human can be given by,

$$
\mathbf { A } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \theta } } _ { t } ) = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { K } \omega _ { k } \mathbf { A } _ { k } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \theta } } _ { t } ) ,\tag{4}
$$

where $w _ { k }$ denotes the LBS weight of the kth joint and $\mathbf { A } _ { k }$ denotes the rotation matrix of the kth joint. Similarly, the translation vector b between canonical and target human can be given by,

$$
\mathbf { b } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \theta } } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \beta } } _ { t } ) = \sum _ { i = 1 } ^ { K } \omega _ { k } \mathbf { b } _ { k } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \theta } } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \beta } } _ { t } ) ,\tag{5}
$$

where $\mathbf { b } _ { k }$ denotes the translation matrix of the kth joint. Subsequently, the position of target gaussians can be estimated by the vertices transform under the human-prior model [5],

$$
\hat { \mathbf { p } } _ { t } = \mathbf { A } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \theta } } _ { t } ) \mathbf { p } _ { c } + \mathbf { b } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \theta } } _ { t } , \hat { \pmb { \beta } } _ { t } ) ,\tag{6}
$$

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
(a) ZJU-MoCap dataset

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->  
(b) MonoCap dataset

<!-- image-->  
Figure 2: RD performance comparisons in terms of Rate-PSRN, Rate-SSIM and Rate-LPIPS on ZJU-MoCap and MonoCap datasets

Then, using equation(3), the estimated target gaussian position can be further transformed to world coordinate with,

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \overline { { \hat { \bf p } } } _ { t } = \hat { \bf p } _ { t } \hat { R } _ { t } ^ { T } + \hat { \cal T } _ { t } . } \end{array}\tag{7}
$$

Meanwhile, the shape of gaussians are adjusted via their covariance,

$$
\Sigma _ { t } = \mathbf { A } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \theta } _ { t } ) \Sigma _ { c } \mathbf { A } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \theta } _ { t } ) ^ { T } = \mathbf { A } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \theta } _ { t } ) \mathbf { R } _ { c } \mathbf { S } _ { c } \mathbf { S } _ { c } ^ { T } \mathbf { R } _ { c } ^ { T } \mathbf { A } ( \hat { J } _ { t } , \hat { \theta } _ { t } ) ^ { T } ,\tag{8}
$$

where $\Sigma _ { t }$ denotes the covariance of target gaussian, and $\mathbf { R } _ { c }$ and $\mathbf { S } _ { c }$ denotes the rotation and scale of canonical gaussian, respectively. By utilizing canonical-to-target transformation at the decoder side, the target 3DGS avatar is reconstructed using highly compact human pose and shape parameters alongside the canonical 3DGS avatar, facilitating efficient multi-view video reconstruction and high-quality novelview synthesis.

## 2.4 Optimization

With the canonical-to-target transformation, the canonical 3DGS can be optimized with rendering results on target avatars. The rendering process can be described as,

$$
\begin{array} { r } { \hat { \mathbf { I } _ { t } ^ { v } } , \mathbf { \alpha } \mathbf { \alpha } \mathbf { \alpha } ^ { v } = s p l a t ( \overline { { \hat { \mathbf { p } } } } _ { t } , \mathbf { \Sigma } , \mathbf { \Sigma } _ { t } , \mathbf { s } \mathbf { h } , \mathbf { o p a } , v ) , } \end{array}\tag{9}
$$

where $\overline { { \hat { \mathbf { p } } } } _ { t }$ and $\Sigma _ { t }$ can be obtained from equation(7) and equation(8), respectively. sh and opa denote the spherical harmonics coefficients and opacity of the gaussians.

<!-- image-->  
Ground Truth

<!-- image-->  
Ours 0.20 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
CompactSTG 14.24 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
GeS-TM 8.86 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
G-PCC 9.32 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
HEVC 15.02 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
VVC 16.38 Mbps

(a) “my337” of ZJU-MoCap at PSNR of 34dB  
<!-- image-->  
Ground Truth

<!-- image-->  
Ours 0.26 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
CompactSTG 18.24 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
GeS-TM 9.69 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
G-PCC 9.54 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
HEVC 16.59 Mbps

<!-- image-->  
VVC 18.01 Mbps

(b) “lan images620 1300” of MonoCap at PSNR of 33dB

Figure 3: Subjective comparisons on ZJU-MoCap [20] and MonoCap [21] dataset at similar quality

splat denotes the splatting process, v denotes the view-point, $\hat { \mathbf { I } _ { t } ^ { v } }$ denotes the rendered image, and $ { \alpha } _ { t } ^ { v }$ denotes the rendered opacity map. Accordingly, the loss function can be defined as,

$$
\begin{array} { r } { L = | | \widehat { \mathbf { I } } _ { t } ^ { v } - \mathbf { I } _ { t } ^ { v } | | _ { 1 } + \lambda _ { 1 } | | \alpha _ { t } ^ { v } - \mathbf { m } _ { t } ^ { v } | | _ { 2 } + \lambda _ { 2 } ( 1 - s s i m ( \widehat { \mathbf { I } } _ { t } ^ { v } , \mathbf { I } _ { t } ^ { v } ) ) + \lambda _ { 3 } l p i p s ( \widehat { \mathbf { I } } _ { t } ^ { v } , \mathbf { I } _ { t } ^ { v } ) , } \end{array}\tag{10}
$$

where L1 norm, L2 norm, Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM) [25] and Learned Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [26] are implemented as loss terms to compared the rendered results with original image $\mathbf { I } _ { t } ^ { v }$ and original mask $\mathbf { m } _ { t } ^ { v }$ Empirically, $\lambda _ { 1 }$ is set as 0.1 and $\lambda _ { 2 } , \lambda _ { 3 }$ are set as 0.01.

## Experimental Results

## 3.1 Experimental Settings

Datasets. We evalute the proposed framework on two widely used multi-view human video datasets, i.e., ZJU-MoCap [20] and MonoCap [21, 27, 28]. For ZJU-MoCap, following practices in [12,21], six human subjects are selected (377, 386, 387, 392, 393, 394), where each subject contains multi-view videos from 23 cameras and more than 600 frames for each view. MonoCap has four human subjects with multiview videos, where two of them have 11 views, two of them have 50 views and each of them has more than 600 frames for each view. For each of these ten sequences, we sample 100 frames with an interval of 5 for both training and testing, and equally number of views are selected for training and testing.

<!-- image-->  
(a) “olek images0812” of MonoCap

<!-- image-->  
Multi-view Reconstruction 0.25 Mbps

(b) “vlad images1011” of MonoCap

Figure 4: Multi-view reconstruction results of proposed method

Comparison Methods. We compare the proposed method to both conventional 2D/3D codecs and learning-based dynamic 3DGS compression method. Specifically, for conventional codecs, 3DGS coding anchors from Joint Exploration Experiment 6.2 between WG 4 and WG 7 of The Moving Picture Experts Group (MPEG) [23] are adopted, including Point-Cloud-Compression(PCC)-based methods with G-PCC [29] and GeS-TM [30], as well as video-based methods [31] with HEVC [2] and VVC [3]. For learning-based dynamic 3DGS compression method, CompactSTG [32] is adopted, where mask-based pruning, network-based color prediction and residual vector quantization are employed for compressing space-time 3DGS [33].

Implementation Details. For conventional codecs, we generate frame-by-frame PLY sequences by training every frame as a single multi-view scene with 2000 iterations, and we follow the rate points in [29–31] for rate control. For CompactSTG, the whole sequence is trained as a dynamic scene with 25000 iterations with its default settings, and we use 4 different pruning coefficients to adjust the compression ratio. And for our method, the canonical 3DGS avatar is trained for 25000 iterations, and GeS-TM [30] codec is utilized for canonical avatar compression with 4 different rate points. For bit-rate calculation, we use mega-bits per second (Mbps) and set Frame-per-Second (FPS) as 25. For evaluation metrics, PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS are measured and rate-distortion (RD) curves are used to compare the proposed method with comparison methods.

## 3.2 Evaluation Results

Rate-Distortion Performance. The rate-distortion performances in terms of Rate-PSNR, Rate-SSIM and Rate-LPIPS on ZJU-MoCap and MonoCap dataset are shown in Figure 2. The conventional codecs from MPEG are denoted as “MPEG-GSC(Codec-type)”. It can be seen that the proposed method achieves ultra-low bit-rate of less than 0.2 Mbps on the ZJU-MoCap dataset and less than 0.26 Mbps on the MonoCap dataset, compared to bit-rates exceeding 1 Mbps for comparison methods, demonstrating the effectiveness of leverage highly compact human-prior parameters for temporal modeling. On ZJU-MoCap dataset, conventional codecs exhibit higher-quality upper-bound, which is potentially due to the frame-by-frame training without canonical-to-target transformation. However, the proposed method demonstrates better qualities on Monocap dataset, where human figures are smaller in the scenes with larger global movements, even with lower bit-rate. Overall, the proposed method achieves superior RD performance on both the ZJU-MoCap and MonoCap datasets, while PCC-based methods outperform video-based methods on human avatar sequences. In contrast, learning-based dynamic 3DGS compression methods exhibit less stable performances, particularly failing to perform well on SSIM measurements for the MonoCap dataset.

Subjective Quality. The subjective comparisons of proposed method and comparison methods are shown in Figure 3. Under the similar PSNR measurements, our proposed method can achieve the most visual-pleasing renderings under the lowest bitrate consumption. Specifically, CompactSTG reconstructions exhibit obvious distortions with large occlusion on “my377” and color deviation on “lan images620 1300”, while the reconstruction of conventional codecs preserve less detail on human faces and are poorly-rendered on the edges of the bodies. Besides, the multi-view reconstruction results are shown in Figure 4, where four different views from 2 sequences of MonoCap are displayed. The proposed method can achieve high-quality rendering on multiple views, demonstrating the high accuracy of target avatar recovery.

## Conclusion

In this paper, we propose to compress volumetric human video with 3DGS representation in a prior-guided manner. By training a canonical 3DGS avatar and extract human parameters of each timestamp at the encoder side, the appearance and temporal modeling are decomposed for high-efficiency and ultra-low bit-rate transmission. Furthermore, the decoder side is equipped with LBS-based canonical-to-target transformation, which enables both position and shape transform of each 3D gaussian, leading to high-quality target avatar recovering and multi-view rendering. The experimental results demonstrate that the proposed method can achieve superior RD performances compared to both conventional-codec-based 3DGS compression methods and learning-based dynamic 3DGS compression method, shading light on efficient immersive multi-media communication for meta-verse applications.

## References

[1] Shanzhi Yin, Bolin Chen, Shiqi Wang, and Yan Ye, “Generative human video compression with multi-granularity temporal trajectory factorization,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, pp. 1–1, 2025.

[2] Gary J. Sullivan, Jens-Rainer Ohm, Woo-Jin Han, and Thomas Wiegand, “Overview of the High Efficiency Video Coding (HEVC) Standard,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 22, no. 12, pp. 1649–1668, 2012.

[3] Benjamin Bross, Ye-Kui Wang, Yan Ye, Shan Liu, Jianle Chen, Gary J. Sullivan, and Jens-Rainer Ohm, “Overview of the Versatile Video Coding (VVC) Standard and its

Applications,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology, vol. 31, no. 10, pp. 3736–3764, 2021.

[4] Dragomir Anguelov, Praveen Srinivasan, Daphne Koller, Sebastian Thrun, Jim Rodgers, and James Davis, “Scape: shape completion and animation of people,” in ACM Siggraph 2005 Papers, pp. 408–416. 2005.

[5] Matthew Loper, Naureen Mahmood, Javier Romero, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Michael J. Black, “Smpl: a skinned multi-person linear model,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 34, no. 6, Nov. 2015.

[6] Shunsuke Saito, Zeng Huang, Ryota Natsume, Shigeo Morishima, Angjoo Kanazawa, and Hao Li, “Pifu: Pixel-aligned implicit function for high-resolution clothed human digitization,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2019, pp. 2304–2314.

[7] Chung-Yi Weng, Brian Curless, Pratul P Srinivasan, Jonathan T Barron, and Ira Kemelmacher-Shlizerman, “Humannerf: Free-viewpoint rendering of moving people from monocular video,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 16210–16220.

[8] Ruihe Wang, Yukang Cao, Kai Han, and Kwan-Yee K Wong, “A survey on 3d human avatar modeling–from reconstruction to generation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.04253, 2024.

[9] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler, and George Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023.

[10] Yang Liu, Xiang Huang, Minghan Qin, Qinwei Lin, and Haoqian Wang, “Animatable 3d gaussian: Fast and high-quality reconstruction of multiple human avatars,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2024, pp. 1120– 1129.

[11] Zhiyin Qian, Shaofei Wang, Marko Mihajlovic, Andreas Geiger, and Siyu Tang, “3dgsavatar: Animatable avatars via deformable 3d gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 5020–5030.

[12] Shoukang Hu, Tao Hu, and Ziwei Liu, “Gauhuman: Articulated gaussian splatting from monocular human videos,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 20418–20431.

[13] Liangxiao Hu, Hongwen Zhang, Yuxiang Zhang, Boyao Zhou, Boning Liu, Shengping Zhang, and Liqiang Nie, “Gaussianavatar: Towards realistic human avatar modeling from a single video via animatable 3d gaussians,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024, pp. 634–644.

[14] Sicheng Li, Chengzhen Wu, Hao Li, Xiang Gao, Yiyi Liao, and Lu Yu, “Gscodec studio: A modular framework for gaussian splat compression,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.01822, 2025.

[15] Zhaoliang Zhang, Tianchen Song, Yongjae Lee, Li Yang, Cheng Peng, Rama Chellappa, and Deliang Fan, “Lp-3dgs: Learning to prune 3d gaussian splatting,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 122434–122457, 2024.

[16] Tao Lu, Mulin Yu, Linning Xu, Yuanbo Xiangli, Limin Wang, Dahua Lin, and Bo Dai, “Scaffold-gs: Structured 3d gaussians for view-adaptive rendering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 20654–20664.

[17] Xiangrui Liu, Xinju Wu, Pingping Zhang, Shiqi Wang, Zhu Li, and Sam Kwong, “Compgs: Efficient 3d scene representation via compressed gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, 2024, pp. 2936– 2944.

[18] Yihang Chen, Qianyi Wu, Weiyao Lin, Mehrtash Harandi, and Jianfei Cai, “Hac: Hashgrid assisted context for 3d gaussian splatting compression,” in European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2024, pp. 422–438.

[19] Wieland Morgenstern, Florian Barthel, Anna Hilsmann, and Peter Eisert, “Compact 3d scene representation via self-organizing gaussian grids,” in European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2024, pp. 18–34.

[20] Sida Peng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qianqian Wang, Qing Shuai, Hujun Bao, and Xiaowei Zhou, “Neural body: Implicit neural representations with structured latent codes for novel view synthesis of dynamic humans,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 9054–9063.

[21] Xiaowei Zhou, Sida Peng, Zhen Xu, Junting Dong, Qianqian Wang, Shangzhan Zhang, Qing Shuai, and Hujun Bao, “Animatable implicit neural representations for creating realistic avatars from videos,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 46, no. 6, pp. 4147–4159, 2024.

[22] Johannes L Schonberger and Jan-Michael Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2016, pp. 4104–4113.

[23] WG 07 MPEG 3D Graphics Coding and Haptics Coding, “JEE 6.2 on anchor generation,” ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29 WG07, doc. no. N01273, July 2025.

[24] Georgios Pavlakos, Vasileios Choutas, Nima Ghorbani, Timo Bolkart, Ahmed AA Osman, Dimitrios Tzionas, and Michael J Black, “Expressive body capture: 3d hands, face, and body from a single image,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2019, pp. 10975–10985.

[25] Zhou Wang, A.C. Bovik, H.R. Sheikh, and E.P. Simoncelli, “Image quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,” IEEE Transactions on Image Processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.

[26] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman, and Oliver Wang, “The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2018, pp. 586–595.

[27] Marc Habermann, Lingjie Liu, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhoefer, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt, “Real-time deep dynamic characters,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), vol. 40, no. 4, pp. 1–16, 2021.

[28] Marc Habermann, Weipeng Xu, Michael Zollhofer, Gerard Pons-Moll, and Christian Theobalt, “Deepcap: Monocular human performance capture using weak supervision,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020, pp. 5052–5063.

[29] Diego Fujii, Kyohei Unno, Keisuke Nonaka, and Kei Kawamura, “Preliminary evaluation results of G-PCC for 3DGS contents,” ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG07, doc. no. m68773, July 2024.

[30] Gustavo Sandri, Franck Thudor, Neus Sabater, and Bertrand Chupeau, “GeS-TM as anchor for 3D gaussian coding,” ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG07, doc. no. m69429, November 2024.

[31] Sicheng Li, Yiyi Liao, and Lu Yu, “A potential video-based anchor for gaussian splats coding,” ISO/IEC JTC1/SC29/WG07, doc. no. 72063, March 2025.

[32] Joo Chan Lee, Daniel Rho, Xiangyu Sun, Jong Hwan Ko, and Eunbyung Park, “Compact 3d gaussian splatting for static and dynamic radiance fields,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.03822, 2024.

[33] Zhan Li, Zhang Chen, Zhong Li, and Yi Xu, “Spacetime gaussian feature splatting for real-time dynamic view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 8508–8520.