<!-- page 1 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
NeeCo: Image Synthesis of Novel Instrument States
Based on Dynamic and Deformable 3D Gaussian
Reconstruction
Tianle Zeng, Junlei Hu, Gerardo Loza Galindo, Sharib Ali, Duygu Sarikaya, Pietro Valdastri , and Dominic
Jones*
Abstract—Computer vision-based technologies significantly en-
hance surgical automation by advancing tool tracking, detec-
tion, and localization. However, Current data-driven approaches
are data-voracious, requiring large, high-quality labeled image
datasets, which limits their application in surgical data science.
Our Work introduces a novel dynamic Gaussian Splatting tech-
nique to address the data scarcity in surgical image datasets.
We propose a dynamic Gaussian model to represent dynamic
surgical scenes, enabling the rendering of surgical instruments
from unseen viewpoints and deformations with real tissue back-
grounds. We utilize a dynamic training adjustment strategy to
address challenges posed by poorly calibrated camera poses from
real-world scenarios. Additionally, we propose a method based on
dynamic Gaussians for automatically generating annotations for
our synthetic data. For evaluation, we constructed a new dataset
featuring seven scenes with 14,000 frames of tool and camera
motion and tool jaw articulation, with a background of an ex-
vivo porcine model. Using this dataset, we synthetically replicate
the scene deformation from the ground truth data, allowing direct
comparisons of synthetic image quality. Experimental results
illustrate that our method generates photo-realistic labeled image
datasets with the highest values in Peak-Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(29.87). We further evaluate the performance of medical-specific
neural networks trained on real and synthetic images using
an unseen real-world image dataset. Our results show that the
performance of models trained on synthetic images generated by
the proposed method outperforms those trained with state-of-the-
art standard data augmentation by 10%, leading to an overall
improvement in model performances by nearly 15%.
Index Terms—Surgical Data Science, Surgical AI, Data gener-
ation, 3D Gaussian splatting, Laparoscopy.
I. INTRODUCTION
C
OMPUTER vision plays a crucial role in advancing
intelligent surgical navigation, planning, and automation
[1]. The effectiveness of deep learning-based surgical vision
models heavily depends on the availability of high-quality,
structured datasets, particularly for tasks such as instrument
tracking, segmentation, and pose estimation. However, ob-
taining large-scale, high-quality labeled datasets remains a
significant challenge in the medical imaging field.
Most deep learning-based methods used in surgical data
science are supervised, requiring a substantial amount of
This paper was submitted for review on 9th August 2025
T. Zeng, J. Hu, P. Valdastri, and D. Jones are with the STORM Lab UK,
School of Electronic and Electrical Engineering, University of Leeds, LS2
9JT, Leeds, UK. (corresponding author e-mail: D.P.Jones@leeds.ac.uk). G. L.
Galindo, S. Ali, D. Sarikaya are with the STORM Lab UK, and School of
Computer Science, University of Leeds, LS2 9JT, Leeds, UK.
annotated image data for training to ensure robustness in
complex and highly dynamic surgical scenarios. Although
semi-supervised, self-supervised, and few-shot learning ap-
proaches exist, they often face challenges in achieving the
same level of performance as fully supervised methods [2].
However, the lack of high-quality labeled surgical image
datasets has constrained the development of these methods
[3]. This scarcity arises from several factors: ethical concerns
in recording surgical videos complicate the management and
sharing of medical data, while issues such as limited field
of view, lens distortion, and frequent obstructions from tools,
blood, and smoke during procedures lead to poor image quality
and incomplete visual information [4]. These challenges make
it difficult to generate high-quality datasets, as detailed anno-
tations require significant time and expertise and are further
impacted by annotator subjectivity.
To address the data scarcity issue, various approaches have
been explored. Some studies have leveraged 3D virtual sim-
ulators to generate synthetic images [5] or employed photo
rendering software [6] to create realistic textures. However,
these images often lack sufficient realism and diversity. Al-
ternatively, SLAM-based methods [7], [8] reconstruct static
surgical scenes but lack the capability to generate structured
labels or diverse datasets for deep learning training. Other
studies have attempted data augmentation via image synthesis
[9], weak annotations
[10], or generative models using
Image-to-Image Translation techniques
[11]. While these
methods improve dataset availability, they struggle to capture
the complexity and variability required for real-world surgical
scenarios.
Recent advancements in Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs)
[12] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
[13] have intro-
duced new opportunities for dataset generation. Both meth-
ods can model complex 3D scenes, and recent approaches
that integrate time-dependent neural displacement fields [14],
[15] have become representative works in dynamic surgical
scene reconstruction. Compared to NeRF, 3DGS provides
explicit scene representation, allowing for efficient rendering
and scene-editing capabilities. This makes 3DGS particularly
suitable for reconstructing surgical environments. However,
most 3DGS-based methods focus on modeling tissue defor-
mation rather than generating structured datasets for deep
learning applications. These methods typically rely on con-
tinuous temporal input to reconstruct previously observed
tissue deformations, limiting their ability to synthesize novel
1
arXiv:2508.07897v1  [cs.CV]  11 Aug 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
Fig. 1: Method Overview. (a) Our method takes images of surgical instruments in various poses as input. (b) Then we
reconstruct the 3D Gaussian representation of the surgical scene. (c) After the reconstruction, our method can predict the
3D Gaussian representation of unseen deformations of the surgical instruments. (d) We render them as realistic images, and
additionally can obtain the tool annotations automatically. In (d) the red boxes indicate the bounding boxes, and the white
areas represent the instrument segmentation masks.
instrument states or automatically generate labeled datasets.
To address these challenges, we propose NeeCo, a novel
framework designed for generating high-quality, labeled sur-
gical image datasets. Unlike prior 3DGS-based methods that
primarily focus on reconstructing dynamic surgical environ-
ments, NeeCo is explicitly designed to generate diverse and
structured datasets by leveraging instrument kinematics and
Gaussian-based rendering. By learning instrument motion
from unordered images, NeeCo enables the synthesis of novel
instrument states, significantly expanding dataset diversity
while ensuring high annotation accuracy.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
1. Novel Dynamic Surgical Instrument Reconstruction
Framework: We propose an innovative framework that syn-
thesizes novel scenes of kinematically-posable surgical instru-
ments, learned from previously observed images of recorded
instrument kinematics (position, rotation, and jaw aperture an-
gle). This framework can reconstruct instruments in dynamic
surgical scenes and predict the view under tool movement,
including unseen pose and position changes for instruments.
2. Dynamic Adjustment Method for 3DGS Training:
We introduce a method for dynamically adjusting the 3DGS
training process. We do this by adopting different training
strategies at various stages. Our approach addresses the chal-
lenges posed by poor initialization from inaccurate camera
poses when using our recorded surgically relevant scenes of
ex-vivo porcine organs as input.
3. Automatic Generation of Annotations: The proposed
method can automatically generate annotation information
alongside the rendered images without human intervention
based on the dynamic Gaussian kinematic changing.
4. Evaluation with Ground Truth (GT) Images of
Anatomy: We record a new dataset using ex-vivo abdominal
organs from a porcine model while tracking our tool state,
producing GT images and data that can be directly compared
with our generated images. Through comparative experiments
on image quality and neural network training using GT images
as the benchmark, we ensure the reliability of our conclusions
and show a marked increase in synthesis quality and compared
with comparable SOTA methods.
II. RELATED WORK
This section examines significant advancements in surgical
scene reconstruction, focusing on traditional, implicit, and ex-
plicit representation methods. Given that our approach empha-
sizes the reconstruction and representation of surgical scenes
that include instruments, we also review current methodologies
for surgical instrument synthesis in medical imaging.
A. Surgical Scene Reconstruction
1) Traditional Representation: Early studies, such as [7],
[8]
relied on stereo inputs to recover scene depth information
through SLAM techniques. These methods generated depth
maps via depth estimation and fused the depth maps from
multiple viewpoints in 3D space to achieve static scene
reconstruction. Subsequent advancements, such as [18] and
[19], introduced new stereo depth estimation frameworks by
tracking the deformations of key points in the scene, enabling
simple 3D deformable reconstruction. These methods heavily
rely on sparse deformation fields for tracking deformations
and are limited when faced with complex or significant defor-
mations, capturing only relatively small changes. Additionally,
the overall quality of the images generated by these methods
is often subpar, further limiting their effectiveness in training
robust neural networks.
2) Implicit Representation: Implicit representations, such
as NeRF [12], have significantly advanced medical imaging.
Unlike traditional methods that rely on spatial geometric
information and the tracking of key deformation points for
reconstruction, implicit representations use neural radiance
fields and deformation fields to capture and represent scene
deformation. This combination facilitates the effective recon-
struction of dynamic scenes. Recently, EndoNeRF [15]
has emerged as a promising solution for dynamic surgical
scene reconstruction. It uses tool-guided ray casting, stereo
depth-cueing ray marching, and stereo depth-supervised op-
timization to achieve high-quality results but suffers from
lengthy training times. To address this, Forplane [20] opti-
mizes training by conceptualizing surgical procedures as 4D
volumes, decomposed into static and dynamic fields with
2

<!-- page 3 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
orthogonal neural planes, reducing memory usage and ac-
celerating optimization. However, these methods neglect the
modeling of surgical instruments and produce non-editable,
limited generalization scenes.
3) Explicit Representation: Explicit scene reconstruction
methods, such as 3DGS
[13], overcome the limitations of
implicit representation methods, which are difficult to edit.
By manipulating the obtained 3D Gaussians, objects can be
rotated and translated without sacrificing reconstruction qual-
ity. Additionally, these methods enable rapid training and real-
time rendering of reconstructed scenes. Similar to EndoNeRF
[15], EndoGaussian [14], and EndoGS [21], which use 3D
Gaussians to represent surgical scenes, recent works have
further adapted 3DGS for surgical applications.
Several studies have integrated 3DGS into dynamic endo-
scopic reconstruction by incorporating temporal deformation
fields and depth priors. Deform3DGS [42] models soft tis-
sue deformations at the level of individual Gaussians, while
Endo4DGS
[43] and HFGS
[44] improve tissue motion
reconstruction by leveraging depth priors and frequency-based
optimization. While these methods enhance real-time render-
ing and tissue dynamics modeling, they focus primarily on
deformable surgical environments rather than instrument state
representation or unseen pose synthesis.
To improve camera pose estimation, Free-SurGS [45] in-
troduces an SfM-free optimization scheme using optical flow
priors. EndoGSLAM
[46] further integrates SLAM-based
tracking with 3DGS to enhance real-time visualization in
endoscopic surgeries. However, both methods are tailored for
static scene reconstruction and do not modify the core 3DGS
training process to handle dynamic surgical tools.
Gaussian Pancakes [47] improves static tissue reconstruc-
tion by incorporating geometric and depth regularization to en-
hance Gaussian alignment and texture fidelity. While effective
for colonoscopic imaging, it does not address the dynamics of
surgical instruments or unseen pose synthesis.
Compared to these approaches, our method focuses on
instrument-centric scene representation, enabling novel tool
pose synthesis and automatic label generation. By introducing
a dynamic training adjustment mechanism, our method en-
hances 3DGS robustness to pose inaccuracies, facilitating ac-
curate reconstruction of dynamic surgical instruments, which
is crucial for dataset augmentation and downstream learning-
based models.
B. Instrument Synthesis in Medical Imaging
Various methods have been developed to generate surgical
instrument images. Game engines and surgical simulators [22],
[23] provide scalable, noise-free solutions that automatically
generate annotations. However, the synthetic images produced
by these methods often lack realism, failing to accurately
replicate the lighting and textures of real scenes, which can
negatively impact the generalizability of models trained on
such data. Generative neural networks like GANs and Cycle-
GANs [24], [25], [26] can create synthetic datasets that closely
resemble real image distributions, achieving higher image
quality. However, these methods can typically only generate
pseudo annotations for tasks like segmentation, and they often
fall short of providing the high-quality, accurate annotations
required for supervised learning. Recent approaches [27],
[28] have attempted to integrate simulation environments with
generative networks, enhancing simulated medical images with
real image characteristics to produce high-quality, annotated
synthetic datasets. Nevertheless, these methods are primarily
designed for static scenes and struggle to modify the pose, ori-
entation, and deformation of instrument end-effectors, which
limits their effectiveness in dynamic surgical environments.
Recent work such as Instrument-Splatting
[29] demon-
strates controllable, photorealistic rendering of previously un-
seen tool poses and jaw configurations from monocular sur-
gical videos, enabling high-quality synthetic data generation.
However, its reliance on precise, part-level CAD models to
bind Gaussian splats to instrument geometry limits accessibil-
ity, as such models are often proprietary and unavailable in
many surgical domains.
III. METHODOLOGY
We propose a method for synthesizing realistic images of
surgical instruments exploiting the recent advances in 3D
Gaussian Splatting. Our approach allows for dynamic selection
of both the user’s viewpoint and the instrument’s kinematic
state (6-DoF pose and jaw aperture angle), allowing for a
user to train a 3DGS model on a limited size dataset before
synthesizing supplemental images to enhance the performance
of neural networks trained on the data. Our model is trained
from a monocular video of a moving surgical instrument
in a surgical scene; each frame is recorded with kinematic
information of the tool’s current state. From this, we train a
deformable Gaussian model using an MLP to decode user-
specified instrument states. Our approach utilizes multiple
enhancements to the training method of deformable Gaussian
models, namely dynamically adjusting the training rates of the
Gaussian’s properties, uniform motion rendering, and dynamic
compensation of camera poses. We also use our trained
Gaussian model to automatically generate segmentation masks
and relevant instrument bounding boxes before proving the
quality of our image synthesis to enhance the performance of
AI-based tool detection and segmentation.
A. Preliminary: 3D Gaussian Splatting
3DGS utilises a field of explicitly defined Gaussians in 3D
space to define and render a 2D scene [13]. We initialize our
3D Gaussians from point clouds generated by COLMAP [30],
following the specified mathematical expression:
G(x) = e−1
2 (x−µ)T Σ−1(x−µ)
(1)
where µ denotes the mean value of the point cloud P(x, y, z)
and Σ is a 3D covariance matrix, expressed as Σ
=
RSST RT . Here, R denotes a 3×3 rotation matrix, and S is
a 3 × 3 diagonal matrix representing the scale. To simplify its
representation, the rotation matrix R is converted into a vector
r. These 3D Gaussians are projected into 2D and rendered for
each pixel using the following 2D covariance matrix Σ′:
Σ′ = JW ΣW T JT ,
(2)
3

<!-- page 4 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
Fig. 2: Training Process Overview. Given a set of unordered images of a laparoscopic surgery procedure, our method represents
the dynamic scene using 3D Gaussians. It synthesizes the Gaussian representation of the instrument in a new pose from novel
viewpoints. The standard 3D Gaussian scene representation is trained in a canonical space. An MLP estimates the attribute
changes during scene deformation, transforming the canonical Gaussians to the new deformation. The transformed Gaussians
are then rendered using rasterization. The rendered images are compared with ground truth images to evaluate the training.
The entire training process is optimized using a dynamic optimization strategy.
where J is the Jacobian of the affine approximation of the
projective transformation, W is the view matrix transitioning
from world to camera coordinates, and Σ denotes the 3D
covariance matrix.
The color of the pixel on the image plane, denoted by C, is
calculated by α-blending the contributions of the N Gaussians,
which are sorted from closest to farthest:
C =
X
i∈N
αici
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)
(3)
αi = σie−1
2 (µ−ui)T Σ′(µ−ui)
(4)
where ci represents the color of each Gaussian along the
ray, and ui denotes the uv coordinates of the 3D Gaussians
projected onto the 2D image plane.
During initialization, the Gaussian is also assigned an opac-
ity attribute σ, thus the 3D Gaussian is defined as:
G(µ, r, s, σ)
(5)
B. Deformable Gaussian Splatting
When part of the scene undergoes deformations, the Gaus-
sian properties in the deformation regions are varied to repre-
sent the new state, expressed as:
G′(µ′, r′, s′, σ′) = G(µ + δµ, r + δr, s + δs, σ + δσ) (6)
To mitigate the impact of dynamic changes in the scene, we
train this standard Gaussian model in the canonical space.
To decode from our canonical model C, we use an MLP
to model the required parametric change in µ, r, and s for
each Gaussian, referred to as the New Pose Synthesis (NPS)
weight F, with depth and hidden layer size of D = 12
and W
= 256, respectively. The NPS weight takes two
inputs: a representation of object movement in the scene, p,
and the coordinates of the Gaussian centers in the previous
frame, µ. The parameter µ primarily represents positional
changes (translation), while p, which includes the rotation and
jaw aperture change of the laparoscopic instrument, captures
the instrument’s deformation. Together, these two parameters
effectively represent the scene’s deformations. We use a po-
sitional encoder (γ) on both p and µ (adapted from [12]) to
enhance training quality, where:
γ(µ) = (sin(2kπµ), cos(2kπµ))L−1
k=0
(7)
Resulting in:
(δµ, δr, δs) = F(γ(µ), γ(p))
(8)
And giving the final representation of the synthesised scene
as:
G′ = C + F(γ(p), γ(µ))
(9)
We do not update the opacity σ during this process, as it
primarily affects the rendering process by determining the
final rendered color. Since instruments typically keep to a
constant colour space regardless of pose, we do not estimate
the opacity. Nevertheless, σ of the Gaussian in the canonical
space is still optimized during training.
It is worth noting that methods like 4DGS [31] and D-3DGS
[16] also use MLPs to model dynamic scenes. However, in
these methods, the primary aim of the MLP is to decouple
continuous dynamic scenes into multiple static scenes. The
MLPs in these methods use a time parameter t to reconstruct
learned scenes within the timeframe of the parent video. In
essence, they do not treat the dynamic scene as a whole;
instead, the MLP learns the Gaussian representation of each
decoupled static scene individually, requiring the input data to
be temporally continuous and within range of the training data.
In contrast, the MLP in our approach is designed to predict
changes in Gaussian attributes based on object movement,
training and learning from the dynamic scene as a whole.
4

<!-- page 5 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
Consequently, our method can handle unordered image inputs
and generate scenes from object movement outside of the
observed values.
C. Deformable Gaussian Training
The input is unordered images that capture a dynamic
surgical scene with instrument deformation. Initially, we use
SfM to calibrate the camera pose and generate a sparse point
cloud representing the scene, along with the object movement
parameter p for each frame. The sparse point cloud is then
initialized into Gaussians and transferred into the canonical
space for training. As the scene transitions from between
frames, the Gaussian attributes µ and p of the current frame
are encoded and fed into the NPS weight, which attributes
necessary to transform the Gaussians from the current frame
to the next.
As training progresses, the NPS weight gradually learns
to induce changes in the scene’s Gaussian representation. As
this is built from changes in µ and p between two frames,
we can generate new frames by inputting arbitrary µ and
p values. We further validate this ability to generate high-
quality Gaussians representing unseen scene transformations
in the experimental section IV. Following the 3DGS [13], we
render the transformed scene’s Gaussians into an image. This
rendered image is then compared with the ground truth image
of the transformed scene to calculate the loss function L, a
combination of L1 loss and a D-SSIM term:
L = (1 −λ)L1 + λLD-SSIM
(10)
It is important to note that the rendering process heavily
depends on accurate camera poses. SSIM (Structural Similarity
Index Measure) is sensitive to spatial relationships within the
image, and viewpoint discrepancies can lead to significant
visual differences and cause SSIM to drop sharply.
Therefore, we assign a higher weight (1 −λ = 0.9) to
the L1 term, reducing the weight of the LD-SSIM term and
minimizing the impact of camera pose errors on the training
outcome. After calculating the loss, we update the attributes
of the Gaussians in the canonical space and all NPS weight
parameters. Fig. 2 summarizes our training process.
D. Dynamic Training Adjustment
1) Dynamic Density Control Adjustment: Density control
is essential to the 3DGS pipeline; it enhances scene detail
by cloning small Gaussians in sparse areas and splitting
large ones in dense areas. It is predefined before training by
three parameters: the densification interval Pdi, the opacity
reset interval Poi, and a positional gradient threshold τpos.
It is, however, particularly sensitive to initialization errors.
Incorrect camera poses introduce numerous erroneous points
into the initialized Gaussian models, and density control
can exacerbate these errors by misplacing or redundantly
multiplying error-prone Gaussians, eventually causing training
failure. While 3DGS can correct errors in static scenes, its
robustness is compromised with dynamic datasets, as pre-
mature density control amplifies errors beyond its corrective
capabilities. These fixed parameters do not accommodate the
Fig. 3: Dynamic Density Control. In the first phase of
training, the Gaussian distributions are newly initialized and
contain numerous error points. During this phase, the loss
function shows fluctuations, and the PSNR values are low but
steadily increasing. In the second phase, the density control
is gradually relaxed throughout the iterations, allowing for the
splitting and cloning of Gaussian points to further enhance the
training quality.
rapid dynamics of real-world scenes. Removing or delaying
density control can mitigate these issues but may compromise
the overall quality of the Gaussian representation, as density
control is crucial for enhancing fidelity and detail.
We propose an adaptive density control strategy, illustrated
in Fig. 3. We partition the training into two phases, guided
by reductions in the loss function and improvements in the
Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR) of rendered images, and
dynamically adjust the density control during the training
process. Existing works [32], [33] also explored the density
control module in Gaussian Splatting, focusing on enhancing
image detail. However, they do not address the negative impact
of erroneous initialization on the training process.
In the first phase, Gaussians are newly initialized and often
contain numerous errors. During this initial phase, we restrict
density control to prioritize correcting these erroneous points
to their accurate positions. We extend densification and opacity
reset intervals and increase the gradient threshold, setting
Pdi = 500, Poi = 10, 000, and τpos = 0.0004. Once the erro-
neous points are largely corrected in the first phase, the second
phase commences as PSNR values exceed 20 and the loss
function consistently declines. Here, we reintroduce density
control, enhancing geometric detail and refines overlapping
areas, significantly improving model accuracy and robustness.
Parameters for this phase are set to Pdi = 200, Poi = 3000,
and τpos = 0.0002.
2) Dynamic Spherical Harmonics Function Update: Simi-
lar to dynamic density control, we adopt an adaptive strategy
for updating Spherical Harmonics (SH) coefficients, aiming to
balance training stability and rendering quality. SH functions
capture illumination and fine-grained scene details, where
higher-order SH terms enhance expressiveness but also in-
troduce increased computational complexity and sensitivity to
initialization errors. In standard 3DGS training, SH updates
typically follow a fixed schedule (e.g., increasing the SH
degree every 1000 iterations). However, this approach does
not account for the impact of accumulated errors in dynamic
scenes, which can lead to instability during training. To
address this, we propose a stage-based dynamic SH update
strategy. During the early training phase, we restrict SH
5

<!-- page 6 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
Fig. 4: Uniform Motion Rendering: The first row shows
random rendering, where the instrument undergoes significant
changes between frames. The second row shows uniform
motion rendering, where the instrument’s movement between
frames is more consistent.
order growth, prioritizing the correction of erroneous Gaussian
initializations. This allows the model to focus on learning
fundamental geometric structures and global illumination pat-
terns, reducing the risk of error propagation. Once the model
stabilizes in later training stages, we progressively increase
the SH order, enabling the capture of more intricate lighting
variations and texture details. This staged update strategy
ensures that SH refinement does not interfere with early-
stage optimization while fully leveraging higher-order SH
capabilities for high-precision scene reconstruction. Compared
to fixed SH update schedules, our method effectively mitigates
initialization errors, improves model robustness in dynamic
surgical instrument reconstructions, and leads to higher-quality
rendering results.
3) Uniform Motion Rendering: In the original 3DGS train-
ing process, input images are randomly selected during train-
ing. However, since our input images include different in-
strument poses, randomly selected images present significant
variations in the instrument’s appearance between two consec-
utive images. An instrument part visible in one frame might
become occluded in the next. These substantial variations
pose challenges for the NPS Weight to accurately predict
Gaussian changes in the early stages of training, causing a
larger computed loss and slowing down the convergence of
the training process.
To address this issue, we introduce uniform motion simu-
lation as shown in Fig. 4. In the first training phase, we sort
the images according to the pose positions of the instrument,
simulating a uniform motion with slow changes. These smaller
object motions (p) are easier to learn, enabling the training
process to converge more quickly. Once the training progresses
to the second phase, we revert to the random rendering
strategy, allowing the model to adapt to larger variations in
the instrument’s poses. Gradually introducing larger variations
helps the NPS learn and adapt to complex changes in the
instrument, thereby enhancing the overall performance and
robustness of the model.
4) Dynamic Camera Pose Compensation: Training with
imprecise poses may negatively impact the training process.
Inaccurate camera poses in real-world datasets can cause
spatial jitter between frames in the test or training set, resulting
in significant deviations between the rendered test images and
the ground truth [34]. We propose a compensation mechanism
for the rendering jitter caused by inaccurate camera poses.
Previous works [16], [35] either directly compensate for
camera poses using estimates from visual-inertial odometry
(VIO) or are specifically designed for tasks involving temporal
interpolation. In contrast, our compensation method can adapt
to errors introduced by camera movements in all directions and
is applicable in stages, aligning seamlessly with the dynamic
training process outlined in this work. This compensation
primarily occurs in the first phase of training:
(δµ, δr, δs) = F(γ(µ), γ(p) + ∆)
(11)
∆= (N(0, σ2) · β · tphase
(12)
where ∆represents the compensation term, modeled as a
zero-mean Gaussian distribution N(0, σ2) to simulate random
camera pose errors. This allows for the modeling of both
positive and negative deviations, ensuring a more realistic
approximation of real-world camera motion noise. The vari-
ance σ2 is empirically determined to balance training stability,
while β serves as a scaling factor to control the magnitude of
the perturbations. The boolean variable tphase determines the
training phase in which the compensation is applied, with a
value of 1 during the first phase and 0 during the second phase.
E. Automatic Annotation Generation
We generate dataset annotations in two steps. First, we gen-
erate a segmentation mask, and second, we use this to define
a bounding box for detection. When instrument movement
occurs, Gaussians (G) in the scene may be represented as
G′(µ+δµ, r+δr, s+δs, σ). When rendered with a new pose,
the NPS weights (δµ, δr, δs) for the instrument (the moving
part of the scene), are much greater than those observed in the
background (mainly static). To identify significant changes, we
experimentally establish a variation threshold Hδµ, Hδr, Hδs.
If the increment in Gaussian attributes exceeds this threshold,
we consider it indicative of substantial deformation, labelling
these Gaussians as constituents of the instrument.
By rendering only the Gaussians corresponding to the
surgical instrument, we can effectively generate a segmented
image of the tool: the background is devoid of Gaussians and
will consequently be rendered black, while the instrument is
colored as normal (with some artifacts around the edges as
a result of low opacity regions of the perimetric Gaussians.
We set a threshold of the pixel’s RGB magnitude on this
segmented rendered image, generating a binary segmentation
mask. With this mask, we can automatically generate min-
imum bounding boxes using the mask’s outer contour and
bounding boxes using the extremity pixel coordinates.
6

<!-- page 7 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
IV. EXPERIMENT
A. Data Recording and Experimental Setup
1) Dataset Collection: Publicly available surgical datasets,
such as SCARED [48] and EndoNERF [15], are widely used
for endoscopic scene reconstruction. However, these datasets
are not suitable for our method due to critical limitations.
The SCARED dataset primarily focuses on static tissue re-
construction and lacks dynamic surgical instruments, which
are essential for modeling instrument motion and deformation.
EndoNERF, on the other hand, does not provide kinematic
data of dynamic surgical instruments, making it unsuitable for
our approach, which relies on 7-DoF motion parameters for
accurate instrument representation and unseen pose synthe-
sis. Given these limitations, existing datasets do not provide
the necessary information required for our study, prompt-
ing us to construct a dedicated experimental platform for
data collection. Our experimental setup consists of a laparo-
scope (Endoskill, MedEasy, China), laparoscopic instruments
(MedEasy, China), an electromagnetic (EM) tracking system
(Aurora, NDI, Canada), allowing 6-DoF motion tracking of
the instrument and laparoscope. Additionally, we modified the
instrument handle with a Hall-effect sensor to measure the jaw
opening angle. Fig. 5 shows the data recording platform.
We used ex-vivo pig tissue and organs during data collection
to create a more realistic surgical environment. Organs were
harvested from pigs reared and slaughtered for the food chain.
We collected data from various tissues and organs, including
the liver, stomach, and colon. These tissues and organs exhibit
different visual characteristics such as color, texture, and
shape, effectively simulating different surgical environments
within the human abdomen. During recording, we used the EM
tracker and jaw angle sensor to capture the 7-DoF data of the
surgical tools and the camera’s 6-DoF pose. We exclusively
utilized lighting sources from the laparoscope to achieve a
more realistic simulation of real-world surgical scenarios.
Our Gaussian model training dataset consists of three
videos, each of a subject organ from our ex-vivo experimental
setup (colon, liver, stomach), containing 576,000 frames with
associated instrument states. To avoid redundancy, we sampled
14,000 frames which were used as a training and validation
set for training the segmentation and detection Neural Net-
works. We collected an additional dataset as a test set. This
dataset contains 300 images featuring various backgrounds,
instrument poses, and deformations not seen in our training
data.
2) Implementation Details: We implement our Gaussian
model training pipeline using Pytorch. All Gaussian models
were trained on an NVIDIA RTX Ada 4500 graphics card
and Intel Xeon W5-2455X CPU. Aside from those set by our
Dynamic Training Adjustment, all other training parameters
are set based on the initial 3DGS work.
We train our Neural Network evaluators on an NVIDIA RTX
4050(6G) graphics card and Intel i7-12650H CPU. All models
were trained using their default parameters for 300 epochs.
3) Evaluation Metrics: For our image quality comparison,
we render full images to compare against the GT. Therefore,
we utilize three comparative evaluation metrics that compute
Fig. 5: Data recording platform.
similarity over the full image: SSIM, PSNR, and LPIPS,
typically used within synthetic image generation [13], [16],
[36]. For our Neural Network evaluators, we use Precision and
Recall for object detection and IoU and Dice for segmentation.
To mitigate the effect of randomness on model performance
evaluation, we conduct multi-fold experiments for each model.
B. Image Quality Experiment
Our image quality experiments evaluated the images ren-
dered by the proposed method, comparing them with the GT
(the last three images in Fig. 6). We replicate our GT images
by inputting the GT 7-DoF data, allowing the model to render
the identical scene as observed in the GT images (column 1 in
Fig.6). We overlaid the rendered images with the GT images to
generate PSNR difference maps, visualizing the discrepancies
between them. As shown in Fig.6, the red areas, indicating
discrepancies, are primarily located in the detailed regions of
the surgical tool jaw and the image edges.
We selected several state-of-the-art (SOTA) methods for
comparison, including 3DGS [13], NeRFies [36], 4DGS [31],
and D-3DGS [16]. Notably, the original 4DGS [31] and D-
3DGS
[16] models could not operate successfully on our
dataset due to inaccuracies in camera pose estimation from
SfM initialization. To ensure a fair comparison, we integrated
our dynamic training adjustment (DTA) III-D1 strategy into
these methods, which enabled their successful application to
real-world data and allowed them to converge on our dataset
. The rendering results of all the comparison methods are
visualized in Fig. 7. Table I summarizes the quantitative results
on different datasets.
As shown in Table I, the rendered images from our pro-
posed method outperform the SOTA methods across various
evaluation metrics on different background datasets. Moreover,
our method achieves satisfactory results even for unseen de-
formations. From Fig. 7, it can be observed that, although the
proposed method exhibits some blurring in certain background
regions, it excels in rendering surgical instruments, with both
the main body and jaw rendered clearly and closely resembling
the GT images.
Among the comparison methods, 3DGS [13] struggles to
accurately render static surgical tools in dynamic scenes, while
NeRFies [36] can only partially render surgical instruments,
producing blurry and unrecognizable results due to it’s reliance
on highly accurate camera poses, which are difficult to obtain
7

<!-- page 8 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
TABLE I: Quantitative result of the comparison experiment
Liver
Stomach
Bowel
Methods
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
3DGS [13]
18.01
0.708
0.643
17.21
0.701
0.553
18.33
0.722
0.631
NeRFies [36]
23.12
0.772
0.493
22.17
0.763
0.441
21.71
0.714
0.512
4DGS [31]
25.23
0.847
0.411
25.41
0.837
0.391
23.41
0.786
0.428
D-3DGS [16]
24.01
0.811
0.462
23.32
0.803
0.422
24.68
0.835
0.431
Unseen Deformation
27.52
0.881
0.353
27.01
0.855
0.301
27.81
0.868
0.337
NeeCo
28.88
0.902
0.273
29.81
0.893
0.274
29.87
0.913
0.281
Fig. 6: Reconstruction result with difference maps. From left to right are the GT image, the rendered image, and the difference
map. The difference map is created by overlaying the two images, with warm colors indicating areas of difference.
TABLE II: Comparison of annotation accuracy across different
segmentation methods
Method
IoU (%)
Challenge IoU (%)
SAM2 [49]
70.24
68.38
S3NET [50]
79.12
77.93
SurgicalSAM [51]
83.07
83.07
NeeCo
88.21
88.21
in real-world settings, leads to poor performance with inac-
curate poses. 4DGS [31] and D-3DGS [16], when augmented
with our proposed dynamic training adjustment strategy, were
able to process real-world datasets. However, despite their
improved performance, their rendering quality remains inferior
to our approach, particularly in capturing unseen instrument
deformations and maintaining fine structural details.
C. Annotation Evaluation Experiment
To evaluate the accuracy of the automatically generated
annotations, we conducted a comparative experiment against
existing 2D detection methods. Specifically, we selected two
SAM-based
[52] models, SAM2
[49] and SurgicalSAM
[51], along with a specialist model, S3NET
[50], which
is specifically designed for medical instrument segmenta-
tion. Among them, SAM2 is a general-purpose segmentation
model trained on a large-scale natural image dataset without
fine-tuning for medical applications, while SurgicalSAM and
S3NET are designed specifically for surgical instrument seg-
mentation.
The experiment was conducted on a subset of 1000 images,
with manual annotations serving as the ground truth. For
evaluation, we followed the standard metrics used by these
methods, computing IoU and Challenge IoU across multiple
datasets. The results are presented in Table II.
As shown in the results, NeeCo achieves the highest
segmentation accuracy. This is because NeeCo identifies
instrument-related Gaussian ellipsoids directly in the 3D
Gaussian space and renders them into 2D labels, avoiding
the cumulative errors commonly introduced by 2D detection
methods. Consequently, NeeCo achieves the highest IoU and
Challenge IoU. In contrast, SurgicalSAM and S3NET operate
directly on 2D images. Although both models are specifically
optimized for instrument segmentation and achieve relatively
good results, NeeCo’s automatic annotation strategy, based
on 3D Gaussian representations, provides a notable advan-
tage, resulting in superior accuracy. Additionally, SAM2, as
a general-purpose segmentation model, lacks fine-tuning on
medical datasets, leading to relatively inferior performance.
These findings demonstrate that NeeCo’s automatic anno-
tation generation method provides highly accurate labels, sur-
passing state-of-the-art medical segmentation models. Further-
more, as NeeCo generates these labels automatically within the
8

<!-- page 9 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
Fig. 7: Comparison of dynamic scene reconstruction using various methods. Each row represents the same training dataset,
with the proposed method consistently showing more detailed reconstruction results, especially in the main body and jaw parts
of the surgical instruments. The notation ‘+DTA’ indicates that the method has been integrated with the proposed dynamic
training adjustment (DTA) strategy.
3D Gaussian representation, it eliminates the need for manual
intervention required by 2D segmentation approaches, making
it a more practical and efficient solution for surgical instrument
annotation.
D. Neural Network Training Experiment
In our neural network training experiments, we validate the
effectiveness of the proposed method using rendered images
for training neural networks. We focus on two common
downstream tasks in RAMIS: object detection and seman-
tic segmentation. We employ well-established and widely-
used models in the respective domains: YOLOv5 [37] for
object detection and U-Net [38] for semantic segmentation.
Additionally, to align with domain-specific benchmarks in
medical imaging, we utilize SOTA neural networks specifically
designed for surgical tool detection and segmentation. Specif-
ically, we incorporate DBH-YOLO [39] for object detection
and RSVIS [53] for semantic segmentation, leveraging our
automatically generated labels.
We train six versions of each model from different source
datasets: 1. real images with GT pose, 2. real image augmented
by standard data augmentation [41]. 3 & 4. synthetic rendering
by D-3DGS [16] & 4DGS [31], respectively, 5. synthetic
NeeCo rendering of the GT pose, 6. a mix of NeeCo rendered
GT pose and new unseen poses. Each dataset contains 1780
images.
Table III summarizes the performance of different models.
Overall, with both DBH-YOLO and RSVIS, the GT and
models trained on rendered images differ by less than 1.5%
in performance metrics, while the mixed synthetic model
shows nearly a 15% improvement over the GT model. For
DBH-YOLO, the GT (Real) and the model trained on the
rendered images by proposed method (NeeCo) show sim-
ilar performance, indicating that networks trained on Ren-
der images can match those trained on GT images. Models
trained using standard augmentation methods (augment) show
performance improvements by rotating or translating the GT
images. This helps them handle certain new deformations in
the test dataset but are limited in introducing novel views and
unseen deformations, leading to only marginal improvements.
Although D-3DGS and 4DGS can synthesize new viewpoints,
their performance lags due to lower image quality. The mixed
synthetic model (NeeCo + real images) outperforms both,
as it benefits from unseen deformations and varied camera
viewpoints, enhancing training diversity and overall perfor-
mance, Additionally, the standard augmentation methods can
be applied to this model to further boost performance. The
conclusions for U-Net mirror those drawn from DBH-YOLO.
Similar conclusions can be drawn for YOLOv5 and U-Net.
E. Rendering Performance Analysis
Table IV compares the rendering FPS and Gaussian point of
NeeCo against D-3DGS [16] and 4DGS [31] across different
surgical scenes. While NeeCo exhibits lower FPS (20–29)
compared to D-3DGS (33–44) and 4DGS (31–38), this is a
direct result of our dynamic density control, which increases
the number of Gaussians to achieve higher scene fidelity. For
example, in the Liver scene, NeeCo generates 280k Gaussians,
nearly double that of D-3DGS (140k), leading to a lower FPS
but richer detail representation.
Unlike methods optimized for real-time rendering, NeeCo
prioritizes dataset quality over speed, ensuring high-fidelity
supervision signals for deep learning models. The increased
Gaussian density enhances the representation of surgical sce-
nario, making it particularly suited for dataset synthesis rather
than real-time visualization. Future work may explore adaptive
density scheduling to balance efficiency and quality based on
specific application needs.
9

<!-- page 10 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
TABLE III: Data source comparison across different model types (Mean and Standard Deviation
Model
Metrics
REAL
AUGMENT [41]
D-3DGS [16]
4DGS [31]
NeeCo
NeeCo + Real Images
YOLOv5 [37]
Precision ↑
0.703 ± 0.007
0.731 ± 0.002
0.422 ± 0.009
0.476 ± 0.007
0.694 ± 0.013
0.776 ± 0.011
Recall ↑
0.831 ± 0.003
0.852 ± 0.008
0.535 ± 0.011
0.557 ± 0.006
0.826 ± 0.011
0.901 ± 0.015
DBH-YOLO [39]
Precision ↑
0.712 ± 0.007
0.731 ± 0.004
0.501 ± 0.008
0.522 ± 0.006
0.704 ± 0.011
0.826 ± 0.012
Recall ↑
0.721 ± 0.004
0.744 ± 0.007
0.501 ± 0.009
0.542 ± 0.008
0.707 ± 0.008
0.829 ± 0.014
U-Net [38]
IoU ↑
0.617 ± 0.008
0.622 ± 0.003
0.421 ± 0.015
0.447 ± 0.009
0.601 ± 0.011
0.683 ± 0.012
Dice ↑
0.763 ± 0.004
0.767 ± 0.009
0.592 ± 0.012
0.617 ± 0.008
0.751 ± 0.009
0.812 ± 0.013
RSVIS [53]
IoU ↑
0.711 ± 0.002
0.723 ± 0.003
0.581 ± 0.011
0.533 ± 0.005
0.703 ± 0.008
0.817 ± 0.009
Dice ↑
0.831 ± 0.005
0.839 ± 0.003
0.735 ± 0.007
0.695 ± 0.009
0.826 ± 0.004
0.899 ± 0.010
TABLE IV: Comparison of rendering speed and number of
Gaussians
Method
Liver
Bowel
Stomach
FPS
Num(K)
FPS
Num(K)
FPS
Num(K)
D-3DGS [16]
44
140
38
170
33
210
4DGS [31]
38
170
35
200
31
230
NeeCo
29
280
24
340
20
380
TABLE V: Ablation study results for the three key parameters
in dynamic density control
Parameter
First Phase
Second Phase
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Pdidef
14.21
0.533
0.633
-
-
-
PdiNC
18.68
0.764
0.421
28.71
0.901
0.273
PdiInv
12.23
0.566
0.674
-
-
-
Poidef
16.32
0.612
0.557
24.22
0.812
0.362
PoiNC
18.68
0.764
0.421
28.71
0.901
0.273
PoiInv
15.51
0.588
0.593
20.58
0.765
0.501
τposdef
16.25
0.611
0.526
24.98
0.721
0.341
τposNC
18.68
0.764
0.421
28.71
0.901
0.273
τposInv
15.50
0.588
0.568
23.83
0.694
0.369
F. Ablation Study
1) Dynamic Density Control and Uniform Motion Render-
ing: In this section, we evaluate the impact of Dynamic Den-
sity Control and Uniform Motion Rendering on the training
process. First, we compared the effects of dynamic density
control with other density control strategies on training. As
illustrated in Figure 8 during the initial training phase, both
Fig. 8: Ablation study on Dynamic Density Control, indicating
differences in Gaussian quality at 6k training iterations, (a)
Kerbl et al. [13], (b) Zhang et al. [32] (c) Ours.
TABLE VI: Ablation Study Results
Metric
SH
Compensation
Epochs
4k
8k
12k
20k
PSNR↑
✗
✗
15.21
16.37
19.02
20.63
✓
✗
15.34
16.77
20.64
22.53
✗
✓
16.73
18.69
20.66
22.81
✓
✓
16.82
18.88
21.54
23.78
(a) and (b) increase point cloud density but fail to correct
errors caused by poor initialization, leading to the over-
generation of Gaussian representations for the instruments.
In contrast, (c) effectively manages density, preventing the
spread of erroneous points and ensuring accurate Gaussian
representation of the instruments (PSNR: (a) 15.76, (b) 14.21,
(c) 17.33). Additionally, we visualize the effects of different
rendering strategies on training. As shown in Figure 9, the
absence of Dynamic Density Control (c) leads to extremely
poor rendering quality, while the lack of Uniform Motion
Rendering (d) results in inaccurate rendering of the surgical
instruments (PSNR: (b) 28.31, (c) 15.42, (d) 22.26). Without
Dynamic Density Control, our model had nearly an 80%
chance of failing to complete the training in our preliminary
experimentation when tuning the SfM settings, underscoring
the importance of this method in our study. To further analyze
the role of Dynamic Density Control, we evaluate the influence
Fig. 9: (a) GT image, (b) results with both Dynamic Density
Control and Uniform Motion Rendering applied, (c) without
Dynamic Density Control, (d) without Uniform Motion Ren-
dering.
10

<!-- page 11 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
of key parameters: densification interval (Pdi), opacity reset
interval (Poi), and positional gradient threshold (τpos). Each
parameter is assessed under three conditions: the default 3DGS
setting (def), our proposed NeeCo strategy (NC), and an inverse
setting (Inv) where parameter adjustments follow an opposite
trend. The results in Table V highlight the necessity of adaptive
control across different training phases.
Pdi affects Gaussian point generation, influencing scene
density and error propagation. In phase one, premature den-
sification amplifies initialization errors, leading to unstable
learning, as observed in the inverse setting (PdiInv), which
results in PSNR dropping to 12.23. In contrast, restricting early
densification (PdiNC) stabilizes training and improves PSNR
by 31.5% compared to the default setting. Once erroneous
Gaussians are corrected in phase two, increasing Pdi facilitates
better scene representation, achieving a PSNR of 28.71 and
SSIM of 0.901, whereas both Pdidef and PdiInv fail to converge
due to accumulated early-stage errors.
Poi controls the removal of low-opacity Gaussians, bal-
ancing noise suppression and scene refinement. In phase
one, delaying opacity resets prevents premature removal of
useful Gaussians, improving PSNR by 14.5% over the default
setting. Conversely, in the inverse setting (PoiInv), frequent
removals cause excessive sparsity, reducing PSNR to 15.51.
In phase two, frequent resets refine geometric detail, where
PoiNC achieves SSIM 0.901, while insufficient resets in PoiInv
degrade performance to PSNR 20.58.
τpos regulates Gaussian movement constraints. A higher
threshold in phase one stabilizes training, with τposNC achiev-
ing PSNR 18.68, outperforming τposdef (PSNR 16.25). In phase
two, lowering τpos enables finer positional refinement, leading
to a 15% PSNR improvement over the default setting, while
an overly low threshold in τposInv causes unstable convergence
(PSNR 23.83).
These findings validate that static hyperparameter tuning
in 3DGS is insufficient for dynamic surgical instrument re-
construction. The NeeCo strategy effectively stabilizes early
training, prevents error accumulation, and enables successful
convergence even in previously unstable models. Additionally,
our ablation study results further support the necessity of
Dynamic Density Control in achieving robust 3D Gaussian-
based scene representation.
2) Dynamic SH Update and Camera Pose Compensation:
We compared the impact of Dynamic SH function updates
and camera pose compensation on training. As shown in
Table VI, the model without any implementation yielded the
poorest rendering quality. The model with only SH updates
showed minial improvement in the early stages of training
(4k-8k epochs) but demonstrated noticeable gains in the later
stages (12k-20k epochs), as the early SH updates focused on
lower orders, allowing the model to better address erroneous
initializations. The model with Dynamic Camera Compensa-
tion exhibited consistent PSNR improvements throughout the
training process. The best results were achieved when both
methods were applied together.
V. DISCUSSION
Recent research has focused on leveraging 3DGS to model
surgical background deformation by encoding time-dependent
deformation fields
[42]–[44]. These methods primarily fo-
cus on capturing and reproducing previously observed tissue
deformations by tracking temporal changes in continuous
video sequences. While effective in recreating background
dynamics, they rely heavily on sequential image data and
cannot predict unseen deformations or generate structured
instrument labels. In contrast, NeeCo takes a fundamentally
different approach by focusing on instrument-centric scene
reconstruction and dataset generation. This is achieved by
learning instrument poses rather then sequential video frames.
Unlike tissue-focused reconstruction methods, our approach is
not constrained by temporally continuous frames, allowing for
greater flexibility in dataset expansion.
While NeeCo can outperform SOTA methods in both
ground truth geeneration and image synthesis, it currently
relies on 7-DoF kinematic data obtained EM tracking system
and a jaw angle sensor. This setup ensures accurate ground
truth for instrument motion, facilitating the synthesis of high-
fidelity training data. However, in real-world surgical scenar-
ios, such precise kinematic tracking systems are not always
available, which may limit the direct applicability of the
approach. Recent advancements in deep learning-based pose
estimation have demonstrated promising results in estimating
instrument motion without relying on external tracking devices
[54]. Incorporating such techniques into our framework could
enhance its applicability by enabling dataset generation using
standard endoscopic video recordings.
NeeCo assumes a static tissue background, which may
not fully represent real surgical conditions where soft tis-
sue deformations occur due to instrument interaction. Where
other methods focus on reconstucting previously seen tissue
deformations, we assume here that the tools do not contact
the background tissue. In order to predict tissue deformations
following a fully unseen movement sequence the method
would need to incorporate dynamic tissue modeling, such as
learnable deformation priors or physics-based tissue defor-
mation models. Dynamic models could further improve the
realism of synthetic datasets and broaden their application to
more complex surgical environments, but are as yet unsolved
and fall outside the scope of this work.
During our experiments, we observed that NeeCo encoun-
ters challenges in specific scenarios, leading to training insta-
bility or degraded rendering quality. First, a limited training
range of observed poses a significant challenge for reconstruct-
ing a complete 3D representation of the tool. Since NeeCo re-
lies on unordered discrete images rather than sequential time-
encoded inputs, insufficient tool motion range results in incom-
plete understanding of the tooland overfitting to the available
perspectives, limiting the model’s ability to reconstruct the
full geometry of the instrument in all states. Consequently,
unseen viewpoints in the test phase exhibit structural instability
or incomplete reconstructions particularly in the tool jaw.
Second, rapid motion in the dataset capture causes significant
motion blur in the images. As a result, the network struggles
11

<!-- page 12 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
to establish consistent Gaussian point correspondences across
different views, disrupting global geometric consistency. In
high-speed motion scenarios, the rendered results exhibit no-
ticeable blurriness, leading to reduced sharpness and structural
consistency in the synthesized images.
VI. CONCLUSION
This paper presents a novel pipeline for generating surgical
instrument deformation images, which, compared to existing
methods, contributes to creating realistic and diverse surgical
image datasets. Our approach introduces dynamic 3D Gaussian
models to represent the deformation of instruments in dynamic
surgical scenes and employs a dynamic density control strategy
to address the challenges posed by poor camera poses in real-
world datasets, which often hinder training.
Additionally, our method can generate annotation files, ad-
dressing the significant challenge of the lack of annotated data
in medical imaging datasets. Our experiments demonstrate
promising results, outperforming recent work and achieving
object detection and segmentation performances that closely
resemble those of models trained on GT imaging. Moreover,
the datasets generated using our method’s capability to render
new deformations and viewpoints further surpass the perfor-
mance of models trained solely on GT imaging.
However, our method has limitations. It struggles to capture
background tissue deformations accurately, particularly when
such deformations follow a specific temporal or operational
sequence. Our future work will address the challenge of
predicting soft tissue deformations from unordered input and
improving the recovery of these deformations.
REFERENCES
[1] P. Mascagni, D. Alapatt, L. Sestini, M. S. Altieri, A. Madani, Y.
Watanabe, et al., “Computer vision in surgery: From potential to clinical
value,” NPJ Digit. Med., vol. 5, no. 1, p. 163, Oct. 28 2022. DOI:
10.1038/s41746-022-00707-5
[2] S. Ramesh, V. Srivastav, D. Alapatt, T. Yu, A. Murali, L. Sestini, et
al., “Dissecting self-supervised learning methods for surgical computer
vision,” Med. Image Anal., vol. 88, p. 102844, Aug. 2023. DOI:
10.1016/j.media.2023.102844
[3] L. El Jiani, S. El Filali, and E. H. Benlahmer, “Overcome medical
image data scarcity by data augmentation techniques: A review,” in 2022
International Conference on Microelectronics (ICM), 2022, pp. 21–24.
DOI: 10.1109/ICM56065.2022.10005544
[4] A. K. Upadhyay and A. K. Bhandari, “Advances in deep learning models
for resolving medical image segmentation data scarcity problem: A
topical review,” Arch. Comput. Methods Eng., vol. 31, no. 3, pp. 1701–
1719, 2024. DOI: 10.1007/s11831-023-10028-9
[5] A. J. Lungu, W. Swinkels, L. Claesen, P. Tu, J. Egger, and X. Chen,
“A review on the applications of virtual reality, augmented reality and
mixed reality in surgical simulation: An extension to different kinds of
surgery,” Expert Rev. Med. Devices, vol. 18, no. 1, pp. 47–62, Jan. 2021.
DOI: 10.1080/17434440.2021.1860750
[6] Y. Liu, Y. Tian, G. Maicas, L. Z. C. T. Pu, R. Singh, J. W. Verjans,
et al., “Photoshopping colonoscopy video frames,” in 2020 IEEE 17th
International Symposium on Biomedical Imaging (ISBI). IEEE, 2020,
pp. 1–5. DOI: 10.1109/ISBI45749.2020.9098406
[7] G. Luegmair, D. D. Mehta, J. B. Kobler, and M. D¨ollinger, “Three-
dimensional optical reconstruction of vocal fold kinematics using
high-speed video with a laser projection system,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging, vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 2572–2582, Dec. 2015. DOI:
10.1109/TMI.2015.2445921
[8] N. Mahmoud, T. Collins, A. Hostettler, L. Soler, C. Doignon, and J.
M. M. Montiel, “Live tracking and dense reconstruction for handheld
monocular endoscopy,” IEEE Trans. Med. Imaging, vol. 38, no. 1,
pp. 79–89, Jan. 2019. DOI: 10.1109/TMI.2018.2856109
[9] L. C. Garcia-Peraza-Herrera, L. Fidon, C. D’Ettorre, D. Stoyanov,
T. Vercauteren, and S. Ourselin, “Image compositing for segmen-
tation of surgical tools without manual annotations,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging, vol. 40, no. 5, pp. 1450–1460, May 2021. DOI:
10.1109/TMI.2021.3057884
[10] F. Fuentes-Hurtado, A. Kadkhodamohammadi, E. Flouty, S. Barbarisi,
I. Luengo, and D. Stoyanov, “EasyLabels: Weak labels for scene
segmentation in laparoscopic videos,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol.
Surg., vol. 14, no. 7, pp. 1247–1257, Jul. 2019. DOI: 10.1007/s11548-
019-02003-2
[11] J.-Y. Zhu, T. Park, P. Isola, and A. A. Efros, “Unpaired image-to-
image translation using cycle-consistent adversarial networks,” in Proc
IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2017,
pp. 2223–2232. DOI: 10.1109/ICCV.2017.244
[12] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for
view synthesis,” Commun. ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106, 2021. DOI:
10.1145/3503250
[13] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Trans. Graph.,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2023. DOI: 10.1145/3592433
[14] Y. Liu, C. Li, C. Yang, and Y. Yuan, “Endogaussian: Gaussian splatting
for deformable surgical scene reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:,
2024.
[15] Y. Wang, Y. Long, S. H. Fan, and Q. Dou, “Neural rendering for stereo
3d reconstruction of deformable tissues in robotic surgery,” in Proc.
MICCAI 2022. Springer, 2022, pp. 431–441. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-
16449-1 41
[16] Z. Yang, X. Gao, W. Zhou, S. Jiao, Y. Zhang, and X. Jin, “Deformable
3d gaussians for high-fidelity monocular dynamic scene reconstruction,”
in Proc IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 20 331–20 341.
[17] O. ¨Ozyes¸il, V. Voroninski, R. Basri, and A. Singer, “A survey of
structure from motion*,” Acta Numer., vol. 26, pp. 305–364, 2017. DOI:
10.1017/S096249291700006X
[18] Y. Li, F. Richter, J. Lu, E. K. Funk, R. K. Orosco, J. Zhu, et al., “Super: A
surgical perception framework for endoscopic tissue manipulation with
surgical robotics,” IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 2294–
2301, 2020. DOI: 10.1109/LRA.2020.2970659
[19] Y. Long, Z. Li, C. H. Yee, C. F. Ng, R. H. Taylor, M. Unberath, et al., “E-
dssr: efficient dynamic surgical scene reconstruction with transformer-
based stereoscopic depth perception,” in Proc. MICCAI 2021. Springer,
2021, pp. 415–425. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-87202-1 40
[20] C. Yang, K. Wang, Y. Wang, X. Yang, and W. Shen, “Neural lerplane
representations for fast 4d reconstruction of deformable tissues,” in Proc.
MICCAI 2023. Springer, 2023, pp. 46–56. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-031-
43996-4 5
[21] L. Zhu, Z. Wang, Z. Jin, G. Lin, and L. Yu, “Deformable endoscopic
tissues reconstruction with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:,
2024.
[22] J. Moore, H. Scheirich, S. Jadhav, A. Enquobahrie, B. Paniagua, A.
Wilson, et al., “The interactive medical simulation toolkit (imstk): An
open source platform for surgical simulation,” Front. Virtual Real., vol.
4, p. 1130156, 2023. DOI: 10.3389/frvir.2023.1130156
[23] S. Grossi, M. Cattoni, N. Rotolo, and A. Imperatori, “Video-assisted
thoracoscopic surgery simulation and training: A comprehensive liter-
ature review,” BMC Med. Educ., vol. 23, no. 1, p. 535, Jul. 27 2023.
DOI: 10.1186/s12909-023-04482-z
[24] M. Sahu, R. Str¨omsd¨orfer, A. Mukhopadhyay, and S. Zachow, “Endo-
sim2real: Consistency learning-based domain adaptation for instrument
segmentation,” in Proc. MICCAI 2020. Springer, 2020, pp. 784–794.
DOI: 10.1007/978-3-030-59716-0 75
[25] M. Sahu, A. Mukhopadhyay, and S. Zachow, “Simulation-to-real domain
adaptation with teacher-student learning for endoscopic instrument seg-
mentation,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. 16, no. 5, pp. 849–
859, May 2021. DOI: 10.1007/s11548-021-02383-4
[26] Z. Zhang, B. Rosa, and F. Nageotte, “Surgical tool segmentation
using generative adversarial networks with unpaired training data,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 6, no. 4, pp. 6266–6273, 2021. DOI:
10.1109/LRA.2021.3092302
[27] E. Colleoni, D. Psychogyios, B. Van Amsterdam, F. Vasconcelos, and
D. Stoyanov, ““Ssis-seg: Simulation-supervised image synthesis for
surgical instrument segmentation,” IEEE Trans. on Med,” IEEE Trans.
Med. Imaging, vol. 41, no. 11, pp. 3074–3086, Nov. 2022. DOI:
10.1109/TMI.2022.3178549
[28] P. M. Scheikl, E. Tagliabue, B. Gyenes, M. Wagner, D. Dall’Alba,
P. Fiorini, et al., “Sim-to-real transfer for visual reinforcement learn-
12

<!-- page 13 -->
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be transferred without notice, after which
this version may no longer be accessible.
ing of deformable object manipulation for robot-assisted surgery,”
IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 560–567, 2023. DOI:
10.1109/LRA.2022.3227873
[29] S. Yang, Z. Wu, M. Hong, Q. Li, D. SHen, S.E. Salcudean, and Y.
Jin, “Instrument-Splatting: Controllable Photorealistic Reconstruction of
Surgical Instruments Using Gaussian Splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:,
2025.
[30] J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,”
in Proc IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2016, pp. 4104–4113.
[31] G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, et al., “4d gaussian
splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering,” in Proc IEEE/CVF
Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 20 310–
20 320.
[32] Z. Zhang, W. Hu, Y. Lao, T. He, and H. Zhao, “Pixel-gs: Density control
with pixel-aware gradient for 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:, 2024.
[33] S. R. Bul`o, L. Porzi, and P. Kontschieder, “Revising densification in
gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:, 2024.
[34] K. Park, U. Sinha, P. Hedman, J. T. Barron, S. Bouaziz, D. B. Goldman,
et al., “Hypernerf: A higher-dimensional representation for topologically
varying neural radiance fields,” arXiv preprint arXiv:, 2021.
[35] O. Seiskari, J. Ylilammi, V. Kaatrasalo, P. Rantalankila, M. Turkulainen,
J. Kannala, et al., “Gaussian splatting on the move: Blur and rolling
shutter compensation for natural camera motion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:,
2024.
[36] K. Park, U. Sinha, J. T. Barron, S. Bouaziz, D. B. Goldman, S. M. Seitz,
et al., “Nerfies: Deformable neural radiance fields,” in Proc IEEE/CVF
Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 5865–
5874.
[37] J. Redmon, S. Divvala, R. Girshick, and A. Farhadi, “You only look
once: Unified, real-time object detection,” in Proc IEEE/CVF Conf. on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2016, pp. 779–788. DOI:
10.1109/CVPR.2016.91
[38] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional networks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in Proc. MICCAI 2015. Springer,
2015, pp. 234–241. DOI: 10.1007/978-3-319-24574-4 28
[39] X. Pan, M. Bi, H. Wang, C. Ma, and X. He, “DBH-YOLO: A surgical
instrument detection method based on feature separation in laparoscopic
surgery,” Int. J. Comput. Assist. Radiol. Surg., vol. •••, pp. 1–11, Apr.
13 2024. DOI: 10.1007/s11548-024-03115-0
[40] S. K. Hasan and C. A. Linte, “U-netplus: A modified encoder-decoder
u-net architecture for semantic and instance segmentation of surgical
instruments from laparoscopic images,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. EMBC
2019 . IEEE, 2019, pp. 7205–7211.
[41] A. Mikołajczyk and M. Grochowski, “Data augmentation for improving
deep learning in image classification problem,” in 2018 Int. Interdis-
ciplinary PhD Workshop (IIPhDW). IEEE, 2018, pp. 117–122. DOI:
10.1109/IIPHDW.2018.8388338
[42] S. Yang, Q. Li, D. Shen, B. Gong, Q. Dou, and Y. Jin, “Deform3dgs:
Flexible deformation for fast surgical scene reconstruction with gaussian
splatting,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing
and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2024, pp. 132–142.
[43] Y. Huang, B. Cui, L. Bai, Z. Guo, M. Xu, and H. Ren, “Endo-4dgs:
Distilling depth ranking for endoscopic monocular scene reconstruction
with 4d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.16416, 2024.
[44] H. Zhao, X. Zhao, L. Zhu, W. Zheng, and Y. Xu, “Hfgs: 4d gaus-
sian splatting with emphasis on spatial and temporal high-frequency
components for endoscopic scene reconstruction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.17872, 2024.
[45] J. Guo, J. Wang, D. Kang, W. Dong, W. Wang, and Y.-h. Liu, “Free-
surgs: Sfm-free 3d gaussian splatting for surgical scene reconstruc-
tion,” in International Conference on Medical Image Computing and
Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2024, pp. 350–360.
[46] K. Wang, C. Yang, Y. Wang, S. Li, Y. Wang, Q. Dou, X. Yang, and
W. Shen, “Endogslam: Real-time dense reconstruction and tracking in
endoscopic surgeries using gaussian splatting,” in International Confer-
ence on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Intervention.
Springer, 2024, pp. 219–229.
[47] S. Bonilla, S. Zhang, D. Psychogyios, D. Stoyanov, F. Vasconcelos,
and S. Bano, “Gaussian pancakes: geometrically-regularized 3d gaus-
sian splatting for realistic endoscopic reconstruction,” in International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-Assisted Inter-
vention.
Springer, 2024, pp. 274–283.
[48] M. Allan, J. Mcleod, C. Wang, J. C. Rosenthal, Z. Hu, N. Gard,
P. Eisert, K. X. Fu, T. Zeffiro, W. Xia et al., “Stereo correspon-
dence and reconstruction of endoscopic data challenge,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2101.01133, 2021.
[49] N. Ravi, V. Gabeur, Y.-T. Hu, R. Hu, C. Ryali, T. Ma, H. Khedr,
R. R¨adle, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson et al., “Sam 2: Segment anything in
images and videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024.
[50] B. Baby, D. Thapar, M. Chasmai, T. Banerjee, K. Dargan, A. Suri,
S. Banerjee, and C. Arora, “From forks to forceps: A new framework
for instance segmentation of surgical instruments,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF winter conference on applications of computer vision, 2023,
pp. 6191–6201.
[51] W. Yue, J. Zhang, K. Hu, Y. Xia, J. Luo, and Z. Wang, “Surgical-
sam: Efficient class promptable surgical instrument segmentation,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38,
no. 7, 2024, pp. 6890–6898.
[52] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo et al., “Segment anything,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[53] H. Wang, G. Yang, S. Zhang, J. Qin, Y. Guo, B. Xu, Y. Jin, and L. Zhu,
vVideo-instrument synergistic network for referring video instrument
segmentation in robotic surgery,” IEEE Transactions on Medical Imag-
ing, 2024.
[54] Y. Jiang, H. Zhou, & G. Fischer, “Development and evaluation of a
markerless 6 dof pose tracking method for a suture needle from a robotic
endoscope.” Journal Of Medical Robotics Research. 8, 2340009 (2023)
13
