<!-- page 1 -->
Gaussian Splatting SLAM
Hidenobu Matsuki1∗
Riku Murai2∗
Paul H. J. Kelly2
Andrew J. Davison1
1Dyson Robotics Laboratory, Imperial College London
2Software Performance Optimisation Group, Imperial College London
{h.matsuki20, riku.murai15, p.kelly, a.davison}@imperial.ac.uk
Website: https://rmurai.co.uk/projects/GaussianSplattingSLAM/
Video: https://youtu.be/x604ghp9R_Q/
Figure 1.
From a single monocular camera, we reconstruct a high fidelity 3D scene live at 3fps. For every incoming RGB frame, 3D
Gaussians are incrementally formed and optimised together with the camera poses. We show both the rasterised Gaussians (left) and
Gaussians shaded to highlight the geometry (right). Notice the details and the complex material properties (e.g. transparency) captured.
Thin structures such as wires are accurately represented by numerous small, elongated Gaussians, and transparent objects are effectively
represented by placing the Gaussians along the rim. Our system significantly advances the fidelity a live monocular SLAM system can
capture.
Abstract
We present the first application of 3D Gaussian Splatting
in monocular SLAM, the most fundamental but the hardest
setup for Visual SLAM. Our method, which runs live at 3fps,
utilises Gaussians as the only 3D representation, unifying
the required representation for accurate, efficient tracking,
mapping, and high-quality rendering. Designed for chal-
lenging monocular settings, our approach is seamlessly ex-
tendable to RGB-D SLAM when an external depth sensor is
available. Several innovations are required to continuously
reconstruct 3D scenes with high fidelity from a live camera.
First, to move beyond the original 3DGS algorithm, which
requires accurate poses from an offline Structure from Mo-
tion (SfM) system, we formulate camera tracking for 3DGS
using direct optimisation against the 3D Gaussians, and
*Authors contributed equally to this work.
show that this enables fast and robust tracking with a wide
basin of convergence. Second, by utilising the explicit na-
ture of the Gaussians, we introduce geometric verification
and regularisation to handle the ambiguities occurring in
incremental 3D dense reconstruction. Finally, we introduce
a full SLAM system which not only achieves state-of-the-art
results in novel view synthesis and trajectory estimation but
also reconstruction of tiny and even transparent objects.
1. Introduction
A long-term goal of online reconstruction with a single
moving camera is near-photorealistic fidelity, which will
surely allow new levels of performance in many areas of
Spatial AI and robotics as well as opening up a whole range
of new applications. While we increasingly see the ben-
efit of applying powerful pre-trained priors to 3D recon-
arXiv:2312.06741v2  [cs.CV]  14 Apr 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
struction, a key avenue for progress is still the invention
and development of core 3D representations with advan-
tageous properties. Many “layered” SLAM methods ex-
ist which tackle the SLAM problem by integrating multi-
ple different 3D representations or existing SLAM compo-
nents; however, the most interesting advances are when a
new unified dense representation can be used for all aspects
of a system’s operation: local representation of detail, large-
scale geometric mapping and also camera tracking by direct
alignment.
In this paper, we present the first online visual SLAM
system based solely on the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
representation [11] recently making a big impact in offline
scene reconstruction. In 3DGS a scene is represented by
a large number of Gaussian blobs with orientation, elonga-
tion, colour and opacity. Other previous world/map-centric
scene representations used for visual SLAM include occu-
pancy or Signed Distance Function (SDF) voxel grids [24];
meshes [30]; point or surfel clouds [10, 31]; and recently
neural fields [35]. Each of these has disadvantages: grids
use significant memory and have bounded resolution, and
even if octrees or hashing allow more efficiency they can-
not be flexibly warped for large corrections [26, 39]; meshes
require difficult, irregular topology to fuse new informa-
tion; surfel clouds are discontinuous and difficult to fuse
and optimise; and neural fields require expensive per-pixel
raycasting to render. We show that 3DGS has none of these
weaknesses. As a SLAM representation, it is most simi-
lar to point and surfel clouds, and inherits their efficiency,
locality and ability to be easily warped or modified. How-
ever, it also represents geometry in a smooth, continuously
differentiable way: a dense cloud of Gaussians merge to-
gether and jointly define a continuous volumetric function.
And crucially, the design of modern graphics cards means
that a large number of Gaussians can be efficiently rendered
via “splatting” rasterisation, up to 200fps at 1080p. This
rapid, differentiable rendering is integral to the tracking and
map optimisation loops in our system.
The 3DGS representation has up until now only been
used in offline systems for 3D reconstruction with known
camera poses, and we present several innovations to enable
online SLAM. We first derive the analytic Jacobian on Lie
group of camera pose with respect to a 3D Gaussians map,
and show that this can be seamlessly integrated into the
existing differentiable rasterisation pipeline to enable cam-
era poses to be optimised alongside scene geometry. Sec-
ond, we introduce a novel Gaussian isotropic shape regu-
larisation to ensure geometric consistency, which we have
found is important for incremental reconstruction. Third,
we propose a novel Gaussian resource allocation and prun-
ing method to keep the geometry clean and enable accu-
rate camera tracking. Our experimental results demonstrate
photorealistic online local scene reconstruction, as well as
state-of-the-art camera trajectory estimation and mapping
for larger scenes compared to other rendering-based SLAM
methods. We further show the uniqueness of the Gaussian-
based SLAM method such as an extremely large camera
pose convergence basin, which can also be useful for map-
based camera localisation. Our method works with only
monocular input, one of the most challenging scenarios in
SLAM. To highlight the intrinsic capability of 3D Gaussian
for camera localisation, our method does not use any pre-
trained monocular depth predictor or other existing tracking
modules, but relies solely on RGB image inputs in line with
the original 3DGS. Since this is one of the most challeng-
ing SLAM scenario, we also show our method can easily be
extended to RGB-D SLAM when depth measurements are
available.
In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• The first near real-time SLAM system which works with a
3DGS as the only underlying scene representation, which
can handle monocular only inputs.
• Novel techniques within the SLAM framework, including
the analytic Jacobian on Lie group for direct camera pose
estimation, isotropic regularisation of the Gaussian shape,
and geometric verification.
• Extensive evaluations on a variety of datasets both for
monocular and RGB-D settings, demonstrating compet-
itive performance, particularly in real-world scenarios.
2. Related Work
Dense SLAM: Dense visual SLAM focuses on reconstruct-
ing detailed 3D maps, unlike sparse SLAM methods which
excel in pose estimation [5, 6, 22] but typically yield maps
useful mainly for localisation. In contrast, dense SLAM
creates interactive maps beneficial for broader applications,
including AR and robotics. Dense SLAM methods are gen-
erally divided into two primary categories: Frame-centric
and Map-centric. Frame-centric SLAM minimises pho-
tometric error across consecutive frames, jointly estimat-
ing per-frame depth and frame-to-frame camera motion.
Frame-centric approaches [2, 38] are efficient, as individual
frames host local rather than global geometry (e.g. depth
maps), and are attractive for long-session SLAM, but if a
dense global map is needed, it must be constructed on de-
mand by assembling all of these parts which are not nec-
essarily fully consistent. In contrast, Map-centric SLAM
uses a unified 3D representation across the SLAM pipeline,
enabling a compact and streamlined system.
Compared
to purely local frame-to-frame tracking, a map-centric ap-
proach leverages global information by tracking against the
reconstructed 3D consistent map. Classical map-centric ap-
proaches often use voxel grids [3, 24, 27, 42] or points [10,
31, 43] as the underlying 3D representation. While voxels
enable a fast look-up of features in 3D, the representation
is expensive, and the fixed voxel resolution and distribution

<!-- page 3 -->
are problematic when the spatial characteristics of the en-
vironment are not known in advance. On the other hand, a
point-based map representation, such as surfel clouds, en-
ables adaptive changes in resolution and spatial distribution
by dynamic allocation of point primitives in the 3D space.
Such flexibility benefits online applications such as SLAM
with deformation-based loop closure [31, 43]. However, op-
timising the representation to capture high fidelity is chal-
lenging due to the lack of correlation among the primitives.
Recently, in addition to classical graphic primitives, neu-
ral network-based map representations are a promising al-
ternative. iMAP [35] demonstrated the interesting proper-
ties of neural representation, such as sensible hole filling
of unobserved geometry. Many recent approaches combine
the classical and neural representations to capture finer de-
tails [9, 29, 48, 49]; however, the large amount of computa-
tion required for neural rendering makes the live operation
of such systems challenging.
Differentiable Rendering: The classical method for
creating a 3D representation was to unproject 2D obser-
vations into 3D space and to fuse them via weighted av-
eraging [17, 24]. Such an averaging scheme suffers from
over-smooth representation and lacks the expressiveness to
capture high-quality details. To capture a scene with photo-
realistic quality, differentiable volumetric rendering [25]
has recently been popularised with Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [18]. Using a single Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP)
as a scene representation, NeRF performs volume rendering
by marching along pixel rays, querying the MLP for opac-
ity and colour. Since volume rendering is naturally differ-
entiable, the MLP representation is optimised to minimise
the rendering loss using multiview information to achieve
high-quality novel view synthesis. The main weakness of
NeRF is its training speed. Recent developments have in-
troduced explicit volume structures such as multi-resolution
voxel grids [7, 15, 36] or hash functions [20] to improve
performance. Interestingly, these projects demonstrate that
the main contributor to high-quality novel view synthesis
is not the neural network but rather differentiable volu-
metric rendering, and that it is possible to avoid the use
of an MLP and yet achieve comparable rendering quality
to NeRF [7]. However, even in these systems, per-pixel
ray marching remains a significant bottleneck for rendering
speed. This issue is particularly critical in SLAM, where
immediate interaction with the map is essential for tracking.
In contrast to NeRF, 3DGS performs differentiable rasteri-
sation. Similar to regular graphics rasterisations, by iterat-
ing over the primitives to be rasterised rather than march-
ing along rays, 3DGS leverages the natural sparsity of a
3D scene and achieves a representation which is expres-
sive to capture high-fidelity 3D scenes while offering sig-
nificantly faster rendering. Several works have applied 3D
Gaussians and differentiable rendering to static scene cap-
ture [12, 40], and in particular more recent works utilise
3DGS and demonstrate superior results in vision tasks such
as dynamic scene capture [16, 44, 46] and 3D genera-
tion [37, 47]. Our method adopts a Map-centric approach,
utilising 3D Gaussians as the only SLAM representation.
Similar to surfel-based SLAM, we dynamically allocate the
3D Gaussians, enabling us to model an arbitrary spatial dis-
tribution in the scene. Unlike other methods such as Elastic-
Fusion [43] and PointFusion [10], however, by using differ-
entiable rasterisation, our SLAM system can capture high-
fidelity scene details and represent challenging object prop-
erties by direct optimisation against information from every
pixel.
3. Method
3.1. Gaussian Splatting
Our SLAM representation is 3DGS, mapping the scene with
a set of anisotropic Gaussians G. Each Gaussian Gi contains
optical properties: colour ci and opacity αi. For continu-
ous 3D representation, the mean µi
W and covariance Σi
W ,
defined in the world coordinate, represent the Gaussian’s
position and its ellipsoidal shape. We omit the spherical
harmonics (SHs) representing view-dependent radiance for
simplicity but report the ablation with SHs in the supple-
mentary. Since 3DGS uses volume rendering, explicit ex-
traction of the surface is not required. Instead, by splatting
and blending N Gaussians, a pixel colour Cp is synthesised:
Cp =
X
i∈N
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj) .
(1)
3DGS performs rasterisation, iterating over the Gaussians
rather than marching along the camera rays, and hence, free
spaces are ignored during rendering. During rasterisation,
the contributions of α are decayed via a Gaussian function,
based on the 2D Gaussian formed by splatting a 3D Gaus-
sian. The 3D Gaussians N(µW , ΣW ) in world coordinates
are related to the 2D Gaussians N(µI, ΣI) on the image
plane through a projective transformation:
µI = π(T CW · µW ) , ΣI = JWΣW WT JT ,
(2)
where π is the projection operation and T CW ∈SE(3) is
the camera pose of the viewpoint. J is the Jacobian of the
linear approximation of the projective transformation and
W is the rotational component of T CW . This formulation
enables the 3D Gaussians to be differentiable and the blend-
ing operation provides gradient flow to the Gaussians. Us-
ing first-order gradient descent [13], Gaussians gradually
refines both their optic and geometric parameters to repre-
sent the captured scene with high fidelity.

<!-- page 4 -->
Tracking
Mapping
Keyframing
3D Gaussian Map
Input video
(RGB or RGB-D)
Window Optimisation
Camera Pose Estimation
Co-visibility Check
Is KF?
Gaussian
Insertion & Prune
yes
Keyframe Management
(Sec 3.3.1)
(Sec 3.3.2)
(Sec 3.3.3)
Figure 2. SLAM System Overview: Our SLAM system uses 3D Gaussians as the only representation, unifying all components of SLAM,
including tracking, mapping, keyframe management, and novel view synthesis.
3.2. Camera Pose Optimisation
To achieve accurate tracking, we typically require at least 50
iterations of gradient descent per frame. This requirement
emphasises the necessity of a representation with computa-
tionally efficient view synthesis and gradient computation,
making the choice of 3D representation a crucial part of de-
signing a SLAM system.
In order to avoid the overhead of automatic differen-
tiation, 3DGS implements rasterisation with CUDA with
derivatives for all parameters calculated explicitly. Since
rasterisation is performance critical, we similarly derive the
camera Jacobians explicitly.
To the best of our knowledge, we provide the first ana-
lytical Jacobian of SE(3) camera pose with respect to the
3D Gaussians used in EWA splatting [50] and 3DGS. This
opens up new applications of 3DGS beyond SLAM.
We use Lie algebra to derive the minimal Jacobians, en-
suring that the dimensionality of the Jacobians matches the
degrees of freedom, eliminating any redundant computa-
tions. The terms of Eq. (2) are differentiable with respect
to the camera pose T CW ; using the chain rule:
∂µI
∂T CW
= ∂µI
∂µC
DµC
DT CW
,
(3)
∂ΣI
∂T CW
= ∂ΣI
∂J
∂J
∂µC
DµC
DT CW
+ ∂ΣI
∂W
DW
DT CW
.
(4)
where T CW represents the 3D position of Gaussian in the
camera coordinate. We take the derivatives on the manifold
to derive minimal parameterisation. Borrowing the notation
from [32], let T ∈SE(3) and τ ∈se(3). We define the
partial derivative on the manifold as:
Df(T )
DT
≜lim
τ→0
Log(f(Exp(τ) ◦T ) ◦f(T )−1)
τ
,
(5)
where ◦is a group composition, and Exp, Log are the expo-
nential and logarithmic mappings between Lie algebra and
Lie Group. With this, we derive the following:
DµC
DT CW
=

I
−µ×
C

,
DW
DT CW
=


0
−W×
:,1
0
−W×
:,2
0
−W×
:,3

, (6)
where × denotes the skew symmetric matrix of a 3D vector,
and W:,i refers to the ith column of the matrix.
3.3. SLAM
In this section, we present details of full SLAM framework.
The overview of the system is summarised in Fig. 2. Please
refer to the supplementary material for the further parameter
details.
3.3.1
Tracking
In tracking only the current camera pose is optimised, with-
out updates to the map representation. In the monocular
case, we minimise the following photometric residual:
Epho =
I(G, T CW ) −¯I

1 ,
(7)
where I(G, T CW ) renders the Gaussians G from T CW , and
¯I is an observed image.
We further optimise affine brightness parameters for
varying exposure and penalise non-edge or low-opacity pix-
els. When depth observations are available, we define the
geometric residual as:
Egeo =
D(G, T CW ) −¯D

1 ,
(8)

<!-- page 5 -->
where D(G, T CW ) is depth rasterisation and ¯D is the ob-
served depth. Rather than simply using the depth measure-
ments to initialise the Gaussians, we minimise both photo-
metric and geometric residuals: λphoEpho+(1−λpho)Egeo,
where λpho is a hyperparameter.
As in Eq. (1), per-pixel depth is rasterised by alpha-
blending:
Dp =
X
i∈N
ziαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj) ,
(9)
where zi is the distance to the mean µW of Gaussian i along
the camera ray. We derive analytical Jacobians for the cam-
era pose optimisation in a similar manner to Eq. (3), (4).
3.3.2
Keyframing
Since using all the images from a video stream to jointly
optimise the Gaussians and camera poses online is infeasi-
ble, we maintain a small window Wk consisting of carefully
selected keyframes based on inter-frame covisibility. Ideal
keyframe management will select non-redundant keyframes
observing the same area, spanning a wide baseline to pro-
vide better multiview constraints. The parameters are de-
tailed in the supplementary.
Selection and Management
Every tracked frame is
checked for keyframe registration based on our simple yet
effective criteria. We measure the covisibility by measur-
ing the intersection over the union of the observed Gaus-
sians between the current frame i and the last keyframe j.
If the covisibility drops below a threshold, or if the rela-
tive translation tij is large with respect to the median depth,
frame i is registered as a keyframe. For efficiency, we main-
tain only a small number of keyframes in the current win-
dow Wk following the keyframe management heuristics of
DSO [5]. The main difference is that a keyframe is removed
from the current window if the overlap coefficient with the
latest keyframe drops below a threshold.
Gaussian Covisibility
An accurate estimate of covisibil-
ity simplifies keyframe selection and management. 3DGS
respects visibility ordering since the 3D Gaussians are
sorted along the camera ray. This property is desirable for
covisibility estimation as occlusions are handled by design.
A Gaussian is marked to be visible from a view if used in
the rasterisation and if the ray’s accumulated α has not yet
reached 0.5. This enables our estimated covisibility to han-
dle occlusions without requiring additional heuristics.
Gaussian Insertion and Pruning
At every keyframe,
new Gaussians are inserted into the scene to capture newly
visible scene elements and to refine the fine details. When
depth measurements are available, Gaussian means µW are
initialised by back-projecting the depth. In the monocular
case, we render the depth at the current frame. For pix-
els with depth estimates, µW are initialised around those
depths with low variance; for pixels without the depth es-
timates, we initialise µW around the median depth of the
rendered image with high variance.
In the monocular case, the positions of many newly in-
serted Gaussians are incorrect.
While the majority will
quickly vanish during optimisation as they violate multi-
view consistency, we further prune the excess Gaussians by
checking the visibility amongst the current window Wk. If
the Gaussians inserted within the last 3 keyframes are un-
observed by at least 3 other frames, we prune them out as
they are geometrically unstable.
3.3.3
Mapping
The purpose of mapping is to maintain a coherent 3D struc-
ture and to optimise the newly inserted Gaussians. Dur-
ing mapping, the keyframes in Wk are used to reconstruct
currently visible regions. Additionally, two random past
keyframes Wr are selected per iteration to avoid forgetting
the global map. Rasterisation of 3DGS imposes no con-
straint on the Gaussians along the viewing ray direction,
even with a depth observation. This is not a problem when
sufficient carefully selected viewpoints are provided (e.g.
in the novel view synthesis case); however, in continuous
SLAM this causes many artefacts, making tracking chal-
lenging. We therefore introduce an isotropic regularisation:
Eiso =
|G|
X
i=1
∥si −˜si · 1∥1
(10)
to penalise the scaling parameters si (i.e.
stretch of the
ellipsoid) by its difference to the mean ˜si. As shown in
Fig 3, this encourages sphericality, and avoids the problem
of Gaussians which are highly elongated along the viewing
direction creating artefacts. Let the union of the keyframes
in the current window and the randomly selected one be
W = Wk ∪Wr. For mapping, we solve the following
problem:
min
T k
CW ∈SE(3),G,
∀k∈W
X
∀k∈W
Ek
pho + λisoEiso .
(11)
If depth observations are available, as in tracking, geometric
residuals Eq. (8) are added to the optimisation problem.
4. Evaluation
We conduct a comprehensive evaluation of our system
across a range of both real and synthetic datasets. Addi-
tionally, we perform an ablation study to justify our design

<!-- page 6 -->
w/o 𝐸!"#
w/ 𝐸!"#
Figure 3. Effect of isotropic regularisation: Top: Rendering
close to a training view (looking at the keyboard). Bottom: Ren-
dering 3D Gaussians far from the training views (view from a side
of the keyboard) without (left) and with (right) the isotropic loss.
When the photometric constraints are insufficient, the Gaussians
tend to elongate along the viewing direction, creating artefacts in
the novel views, and affecting the camera tracking.
choices. Finally, we present qualitative results of our sys-
tem operating live using a monocular camera, illustrating its
practicality and high fidelity reconstruction.
4.1. Experimental Setup
Datasets
For our quantitative analysis, we evaluate our
method on the TUM RGB-D dataset [34] (3 sequences) and
the Replica dataset [33] (8 sequences), following the evalu-
ation in [35]. For qualitative results, we use self-captured
real-world sequences recorded by Intel Realsense d455.
Since the Replica dataset is designed for RGB-D SLAM
evaluation, it contains challenging purely rotational cam-
era motions. We hence use the Replica dataset for RGB-D
evaluation only. The TUM RGB-D dataset is used for both
monocular and RGB-D evaluation.
Implementation Details
We run our SLAM on a desktop
with Intel Core i9 12900K 3.50GHz and a single NVIDIA
GeForce RTX 4090. We present results from our multi-
process implementation aimed at real-time applications.
For a fair comparison with other methods on Replica, we
additionally report result for single-process implementation
which performs more mapping iterations. As with 3DGS,
time-critical rasterisation and gradient computation are im-
plemented using CUDA. The rest of the SLAM pipeline is
developed with PyTorch. Details of hyperparameters are
provided in the supplementary material.
Metrics
For camera tracking accuracy, we report the Root
Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the Absolute Trajectory Er-
ror (ATE) of the keyframes. To evaluate map quality, we re-
port standard photometric rendering quality metrics (PSNR,
SSIM and LPIPS) following the evaluation protocol used
in [29]. To evaluate the map quality, on every fifth frame,
rendering metrics are computed. We exclude the keyframes
(training views). We report the average across three runs for
all our evaluations. In the tables, the best result is in bold,
and the second best is underlined.
Baseline Methods
We primarily benchmark our SLAM
method against other approaches that, like ours, do not have
explicit loop closure. In monocular settings, we compare
with state-of-the-art classical and learning-based direct vi-
sual odometry (VO) methods.
Specifically, we compare
DSO [5], DepthCov [4], and DROID-SLAM [38] in VO
configurations. These methods are selected based on their
public reporting of results on the benchmark (TUM dataset)
or the availability of their source code for getting the bench-
mark result. Since one of our focuses is the online scale esti-
mation under monocular scale ambiguity, the method which
uses ground truth poses for the system initialisation such
as [14] is not considered for the comparison. In the RGB-
D case, we compare against neural-implicit SLAM meth-
ods [8, 9, 29, 35, 41, 45, 48] which are also map-centric,
rendering-based and do not perform loop closure.
4.2. Quantitative Evaluation
Camera Tracking Accuracy
Table 1 shows the tracking
results on the TUM RGB-D dataset. In the monocular set-
ting, our method surpasses other baselines without requiring
any deep priors. Furthermore, our performance is compara-
ble to systems which perform explicit loop closure. This
clearly highlights that there still remains potential for en-
hancing the tracking of monocular SLAM by exploring fun-
damental SLAM representations.
Our RGB-D method shows better performance than any
other baseline method.
Notably, our system surpasses
ORB-SLAM in the fr1 sequences, narrowing the gap be-
tween Map-centric SLAM and the state-of-the-art sparse
frame-centric methods. Table 2 reports results on the syn-
thetic Replica dataset. Our single-process implementation
shows competitive performance and achieves the best re-
sult in 6 out of 8 sequences. Our multi-process implemen-
tation which performs fewer mapping iterations still per-
forms comparably. In contrast to other methods, our system
demonstrates higher performance on real-world data (TUM
RGB-D), by optimising the Gaussian positions to compen-
sate for the sensor noise.
Novel View Rendering
Table 5 summarises the novel
view rendering performance of our method with RGB-D
input. We consistently show the best performance across
most sequences and is least second best.
Our rendering
FPS is hundreds of times faster than other methods, offer-
ing a significant advantage for applications which require

<!-- page 7 -->
Input
Loop-
closure
Method
fr1/desk
fr2/xyz
fr3/office
Avg.
Monocular
w/o
DSO [5]
22.4
1.10
9.50
11.0
DROID-VO [38]
5.20
10.7
7.30
7.73
DepthCov-VO [4]
5.60
1.20
68.8
25.2
Ours
3.78
4.60
3.50
3.96
w/
DROID-SLAM [38]
1.80
0.50
2.80
1.70
ORB-SLAM2 [21]
1.90
0.60
2.40
1.60
RGB-D
w/o
iMAP [35]
4.90
2.00
5.80
4.23
NICE-SLAM [48]
4.26
6.19
3.87
4.77
DI-Fusion [8]
4.40
2.00
5.80
4.07
Vox-Fusion [45]
3.52
1.49
26.01
10.34
ESLAM [9]
2.47
1.11
2.42
2.00
Co-SLAM [41]
2.40
1.70
2.40
2.17
Point-SLAM [29]
4.34
1.31
3.48
3.04
Ours
1.50
1.44
1.49
1.47
w/
BAD-SLAM [31]
1.70
1.10
1.70
1.50
Kintinous [42]
3.70
2.90
3.00
3.20
ORB-SLAM2 [21]
1.60
0.40
1.00
1.00
Table 1. Camera tracking result on TUM for monocular and
RGB-D. ATE RMSE in cm is reported. In both monocular and
RGB-D cases, we achieve state-of-the-art performance. In partic-
ular, in the monocular case, not only do we outperform systems
which use deep prior, but we achieve comparable performance
with many of the RGB-D systems.
Method
r0
r1
r2
o0
o1
o2
o3
o4
Avg.
iMAP [35]
3.12
2.54
2.31
1.69
1.03
3.99
4.05
1.93
2.58
NICE-SLAM
0.97
1.31
1.07
0.88
1.00
1.06
1.10
1.13
1.07
Vox-Fusion [45]
1.37
4.70
1.47
8.48
2.04
2.58
1.11
2.94
3.09
ESLAM [9]
0.71
0.70
0.52
0.57
0.55
0.58
0.72
0.63
0.63
Point-SLAM [29]
0.61
0.41
0.37
0.38
0.48
0.54
0.69
0.72
0.53
Ours
0.44
0.32
0.31
0.44
0.52
0.23
0.17
2.25
0.58
Ours (sp)
0.33
0.22
0.29
0.36
0.19
0.25
0.12
0.81
0.32
Table 2. Camera tracking result on Replica for RGB-D SLAM.
ATE RMSE in cm is reported. We achieve best performance across
most sequences. Here, Ours is our multi-process implementation
and Ours (sp) is the single-process implementation which ensures
a certain amount of mapping iteration similar to other works.
Input
Method
fr1/desk
fr2/xyz
fr3/office
Avg.
Mono
w/o Eiso
4.16
4.66
5.73
4.83
w/o kf selection
13.2
4.36
8.65
8.73
Ours
3.78
4.60
3.50
3.96
RGB-D
w/o Egeo
2.39
0.62
4.98
2.66
w/o kf selection
1.64
1.49
2.60
1.90
Ours
1.50
1.44
1.49
1.47
Table 3. Ablation Study on TUM RGB-D dataset. We analyse
the usefulness of isotropic regularisation, geometric residual, and
keyframe selection to our SLAM system. Further isotropic regu-
larisation ablation is available in supplementary.
Memory Usage [MB]
iMAP [35]
NICE-SLAM [48]
Co-SLAM [41]
Ours (Mono)
Ours (RGB-D)
0.8MB
40.3.4MB
6.4MB
2.6MB
3.97MB
Table 4. Memory Analysis on TUM RGB-D dataset. The base-
line numbers are computed from the parameter numbers in [41]
real-time map interaction. While Point-SLAM is compet-
itive, that method focuses on view synthesis rather than
novel-view synthesis. Their view synthesis is conditional
on the availability of depth due to the depth-guided ray-
sampling, making novel-view synthesis challenging.
On
the other hand, our rasterisation-based approach does not
require depth guidance and achieves efficient, high-quality,
Method
PSNR[db]↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Rendering FPS
NICE-SLAM[48]
24.42
0.809
0.233
0.54
Vox-Fusion[45]
24.41
0.801
0.236
2.17
Point-SLAM [29]
35.17
0.975
0.124
1.33
ours
38.94
0.968
0.070
769
Table 5. Average rendering performance on Replica (RGB-D).
Our method outperforms most of the rendering metrics compared
to existing methods.
Note that Point-SLAM uses ground-truth
depth to guide sampling along rays. The full detail is available
in supplementary.
Point-SLAM
Ours
GT
Figure 4. Rendering examples on Replica. Point-SLAM struggle
with rendering fine details due to the stochastic ray sampling.
novel view synthesis. Fig. 4 provides a qualitative compar-
ison of the rendering of ours and Point-SLAM (with depth
guidance).
Ablative Analysis
In Table 3, we perform ablation to con-
firm our design choices. Isotropic regularisation and ge-
ometric residual improve the tracking of monocular and
RGB-D SLAM respectively, as they aid in constraining the
geometry when photometric signals are weak.
For both
cases, keyframe selection significantly improves systems
performance, as it automatically chooses suitable keyframes
based on our occlusion-aware keyframe selection and man-
agement. We further compare the memory usage of dif-
ferent 3D representations in Table 4. MLP-based iMAP is
clearly more memory efficient, but it struggles to express
high-fidelity 3D scenes due to the limited capacity of small
MLP. Compared with a voxel grid of features used in NICE-
SLAM, our method uses significantly less memory.
Convergence Basin Analysis
In our SLAM experiments,
we discovered that 3D Gaussian maps have a notably large
convergence basin for camera localisation. To investigate
further, we conducted a convergence funnel analysis, an
evaluation methodology proposed in [19] and used in [23].
Here, we train a 3D representation (e.g. 3DGS) using 9

<!-- page 8 -->
Ours w/ depth
Ours w/o depth
Hash Grid SDF
MLP SDF
Camera Layout
Figure 5. Convergence basin analysis: Left: 3D Gaussian map
from training views (Yellow) and visualisation of the test poses
(Red) and target pose (Blue). Right: Convergence basin of our
method. The green marks success, and the red marks failure.
Figure 6. Monocular SLAM result on fr1/desk sequence: We
show the reconstructed 3D Gaussian maps (Left) and novel view
synthesis result (Right).
Method
seq1
seq2
seq3
Avg.
Neural SDF (Hash Grid)
0.13
0.15
0.16
0.14
Neural SDF (MLP)
0.40
0.38
0.22
0.33
Ours w/o depth
0.82
0.91
0.65
0.79
Ours w/ depth
0.83
1.0
0.65
0.82
Table 6. Camera convergence analysis. We report the ratio of
successful camera convergence for the different sequences, across
different differentiable 3D representations.
fixed views arranged in a square. We set the viewpoint in
the middle of the square to be the target view. As shown
in Fig 5, we uniformly sample a position, creating a funnel.
From the sampled position, given the RGB image of the
target view, we perform camera pose optimisation for 1000
iterations. The optimisation is successful if it converges to
within 1cm of the target view within the fixed iterations.
We compare our Gaussian approach with Co-SLAM [41]’s
network (Hash Grid SDF) and iMAP’s [35] network with
Co-SLAM’s SDF loss for further geometric accuracy (MLP
Figure 7. Self-captured Scenes: Challenging scenes and objects,
for example, transparent glasses and crinkled texture of salad are
captured by our monocular SLAM running live.
Neural SDF). We render the training views using a synthetic
Replica dataset and create three sequences for testing (seq1,
seq2 and seq3). The width of the square formed by the
training view is 0.5m, and the test cameras are distributed
with radii ranging from 0.2m to 1.2m, covering a larger
area than the training view. When training the map, the
three methods— Ours w/depth, Hash Grid SDF, and MLP
SDF—use RGB-D images, whereas Ours w/o depth utilises
only colour images. Fig. 5 shows the qualitative results and
Table 6 reports the success rate. For both with and without
depth for training, our method shows better convergence.
Unlike hashing and positional encoding which can lead to
signal conflict, anisotropic Gaussians form a smooth gradi-
ent in 3D space, increasing the convergence basin. Further
experimental details are available in the supplementary.
4.3. Qualitative Results
We report both the 3D reconstruction of the SLAM dataset
and self-captured sequences. In Fig. 6, we visualise the
monocular SLAM reconstruction of fr1/desk. The place-
ments of the Gaussians are geometrically sensible and are
3D coherent, and our rendering from the different view-
points highlights the quality of our systems’ novel view
synthesis. In Fig. 7, we self-capture challenging scenes for
monocular SLAM. By not explicitly modelling a surface,
our system naturally handles transparent objects which is
challenging for many other SLAM systems.
5. Conclusion
We have proposed the first SLAM method using 3D Gaus-
sians as a SLAM representation. Via efficient volume ren-
dering, our system significantly advances the fidelity and di-
versity of object materials a live SLAM system can capture.
Our system achieves state-of-the-art performance across
benchmarks for both monocular and RGB-D cases. Inter-

<!-- page 9 -->
esting directions for future research are the integration of
loop closure for handling large-scale scenes and extraction
of geometry such as surface normal as Gaussians do not ex-
plicitly represent the surface.
6. Acknowledgement
Research presented in this paper has been supported by
Dyson Technology Ltd. We are very grateful to Eric Dex-
heimer, Kirill Mazur, Xin Kong, Marwan Taher, Ignacio
Alzugaray, Gwangbin Bae, Aalok Patwardhan, and mem-
bers of the Dyson Robotics Lab for their advice and insight-
ful discussions.

<!-- page 10 -->
Supplementary Material
7. Implementation Details
7.1. System Details and Hyperparameters
7.1.1
Tracking and Mapping (Sec. 3.3.1 and 3.3.3)
Learning Rates
We use the Adam optimiser for both
camera poses and Gaussian parameters optimisation. For
camera poses, we used 0.003 for rotation and 0.001 for
translation. For 3D Gaussians, we used the default learn-
ing parameters of the original Gaussian Splatting imple-
mentation [11], apart from in monocular setting where we
increase the learning rate of the positions of the Gaussians
µW by a factor of 10.
Iteration numbers
100 tracking iterations are performed
per frame for across all experiments. However, we termi-
nate the iterations early if the magnitude of the pose update
becomes less than 10−4. For mapping, 150 iterations are
used for the single-process implementation.
Loss Weights
Given a depth observation, for tracking we
minimise both photometric Eq. (7) and geometric residual
Eq. (8) as:
min
T CW ∈SE(3) λphoEpho + (1 −λpho)Egeo ,
(12)
and similarly, for mapping we modify Eq. (11) to:
min
T k
CW ∈SE(3),G,
∀k∈W
X
∀k∈W
(λphoEk
pho + (1 −λpho)Ek
geo)
+ λisoEiso .
(13)
We set λpho = 0.9 for all RGB-D experiments, and λiso =
10 for both monocular and RGB-D experiments.
7.1.2
Keyframing (Sec. 3.3.2)
Gaussian Covisibility Check (Sec. 3.3.2)
As described
in Sec. 3.3.2, keyframe selection is based on the covisibility
of the Gaussians. Between two keyframes i, j, we define
the covisibility using the Intersection of Union (IOU) and
Overlap Coefficient (OC):
IOUcov(i, j) = |Gv
i ∩Gv
j |
|Gv
i ∪Gv
j | ,
(14)
OCcov(i, j) =
|Gv
i ∩Gv
j |
min(|Gv
i |, |Gv
j |) ,
(15)
where Gv
i is the Gaussians visible in keyframe i, based on
visibility check described in Section 3.3.2, Gaussian Covisi-
bility. A keyframe i is added to the keyframe window Wk if
given last keyframe j, IOUcov(i, j) < kfcov or if the rela-
tive translation tij > kfm ˆDi, where ˆDi is the median depth
of frame i. For Replica kfcov = 0.95, kfm = 0.04 and for
TUM kfcov = 0.90, kfm = 0.08. We remove the regis-
tered keyframe j in Wk if the OCcov(i, j) < kfc, where
keyframe i is the latest added keyframe. For both Replica
and TUM, we set the cutoff to kfc = 0.3. We set the size
of the keyframe window to be for Replica, |Wk| = 10, and
for TUM, |Wk| = 8.
Gaussian Insertion and Pruning (Sec. 3.3.2)
As we op-
timise the positions of Gaussians and prune geometrically
unstable Gaussians, we do not require any strong prior such
as depth observation for Gaussian initialisation. When in-
serting new Gaussians in a monocular setting, we randomly
sample the Gaussians position µW using rendered depth
D.
Since the estimated depth may sometimes be incor-
rect, we account for this by initialising the Gaussians with
some variance. For a pixel p where the rendered depth Dp
exists, we sample the depth from N(Dp, 0.2σD). Other-
wise, for unobserved regions, we initialise the Gaussians
by sampling from N( ˆD, 0.5σD), where ˆD is the median of
D. For pruning, as described in Section 3.3.2, we perform
visibility-based pruning, where if new Gaussians inserted
within the last 3 keyframes are not observed by at least 3
other frames, they are pruned. We only perform visibility-
based pruning once the keyframe window Wk is full. Ad-
ditionally, we prune all Gaussians with opacity of less than
0.7.
8. Evaluation details
8.1. Camera Tracking Accuracy (Table 1 and Ta-
ble 2)
8.1.1
Evaluation Metric
We measured the keyframe absolute trajectory error (ATE)
RMSE. For monocular evaluation, we perform scale align-
ment between the estimated scale-free and ground-truth tra-
jectories. For RGB-D evaluation, we only align the esti-
mated trajectory and ground truth without scale adjustment.
8.1.2
Baseline Results
Table 1
Numbers for monocular DROID-SLAM [38]
and ORB-SLAM [21] is taken from [14].
We have lo-
cally run DSO [5], DepthCov [4] and DROID-VO [38] –
which is DROID-SLAM without loop closure and global
bundle adjustment.
For the RGB-D case, numbers for
NICE-SLAM [48], DI-Fusion [8], Vox-Fusion [45], Point-
SLAM [29] are taken from Point-SLAM [29], and numbers
for iMAP [35], BAD-SLAM [31], Kintinous [42], ORB-
SLAM [21] are from iMAP [35], and ald all the other base-

<!-- page 11 -->
lines: ESLAM [9], Co-SLAM [41] are from each individual
papers.
Table 2 and 5
We took the numbers from Point-
SLAM [29] paper.
Table 4
The numbers are from Co-SLAM [41] paper.
8.2. Rendering Performance (Table 5)
We provide the full detail of the rendering performance
evaluation in Table 7.
In Table 5, we reported the photometric quality metrics
(PSNR, SSIM and LPIPS) and rendering fps of our meth-
ods. We demonstrated that our rendering fps (769) is much
higher than other existing methods (VoxFusion is the sec-
ond best with 2.17fps). Here we describe the detail of how
we measured the fps. The rendering time refers to the dura-
tion necessary for full-resolution rendering (1200 × 680 for
the Replica sequence). For each method, we perform 100
renderings and report the average time taken per rendering.
The reported rendering fps is found by taking 1 and dividing
it by the average rendering time. We summarise the num-
bers in Table 8. Note that the “rendering fps” means the
fps just for the forward rendering, which differs from the
end-to-end system fps reported in Table 9 and 10.
8.3. The convergence basin analysis (Table 6 and
Fig 5)
8.3.1
The detail of the benchmark Dataset
For convergence basin analysis, we create three datasets by
rendering the synthetic Replica dataset. In addition to the
qualitative visualisation in Figure 5, we report more detailed
camera pose distributions in Figure 8. Figure 8 shows the
camera view frustums of the test (red), training (yellow) and
target (blue) views. As we mentioned in the main paper, we
set the training view in the shape of a square with a width of
0.5m and test views are distributed with radii ranging from
0.2m to 1.2m, covering a larger area than the training views.
We only apply displacements to the camera translation but
not to the rotation. For each sequence, we use a total of 67
test views.
8.3.2
Training setup
For each method, the 3D representation is trained for 30000
iterations using the training views. Here, we detail the train-
ing setup of each of the methods:
Ours
We evaluated our method under two settings: “w/
depth” and “w/o depth”, where we train the initial 3D Gaus-
sian map Ginit with and without depth supervision. In the
Test views
Training views
Target view
Overlayed views
Figure 8. 2D Visualisation of the camera pose distributions
used for convergence basin analysis in Figure 5.
“w/o depth” setting, the 3D Gaussians’ positions are ran-
domly initialised, and we minimise the monocular mapping
cost Eq. (11) for the 3D Gaussian training, but keeping the
camera poses fixed. Specifically, let k ∈N be a number of
training views and 3D Gaussians G, we find Ginit by:
Ginit = arg min
G
X
∀k∈W
Ek
pho + λisoEiso .
(16)
Note that training views’ camera poses T k
CW are fixed dur-
ing the optimisation.
In the “w/ depth” setting, we train the Gaussian map by
minimising the same cost function as our RGB-D SLAM
system:
Ginit = arg min
G
X
∀k∈W
(λphoEk
pho + (1 −λpho)Ek
geo)
+ λisoEiso ,
(17)
where we use λpho = 0.9 and λiso = 10 for all the experi-
ments
Baseline Methods
For Hash Grid SDF, we trained the
same network architecture as Co-SLAM [41]. For MLP
SDF, we trained the network of iMAP [35]. For both base-
lines, we supervised networks with the same loss functions
as Co-SLAM, which are colour rendering loss Lrgb, depth
rendering loss Ldepth, SDF loss Lfs, free-space loss Lfs,
and smoothness loss Lsmooth. Please refer to the original

<!-- page 12 -->
Method
Metric
room0
room1
room2
office0
office1
office2
office3
office4
Avg.
Rendering FPS
NICE-SLAM [48]
PSNR[dB] ↑
22.12
22.47
24.52
29.07
30.34
19.66
22.23
24.94
24.42
0.54
SSIM ↑
0.689
0.757
0.814
0.874
0.886
0.797
0.801
0.856
0.809
LPIPS↓
0.33
0.271
0.208
0.229
0.181
0.235
0.209
0.198
0.233
Vox-Fusion [45]
PSNR[dB] ↑
22.39
22.36
23.92
27.79
29.83
20.33
23.47
25.21
24.41
2.17
SSIM ↑
0.683
0.751
0.798
0.857
0.876
0.794
0.803
0.847
0.801
LPIPS↓
0.303
0.269
0.234
0.241
0.184
0.243
0.213
0.199
0.236
Point-SLAM [29]
PSNR[dB] ↑
32.40
34.08
35.5
38.26
39.16
33.99
33.48
33.49
35.17
1.33
SSIM ↑
0.974
0.977
0.982
0.983
0.986
0.96
0.960
0.979
0.975
LPIPS↓
0.113
0.116
0.111
0.1
0.118
0.156
0.132
0.142
0.124
Ours
PSNR[dB] ↑
34.83
36.43
37.49
39.95
42.09
36.24
36.7
36.07
37.50
769
SSIM ↑
0.954
0.959
0.965
0.971
0.977
0.964
0.963
0.957
0.960
LPIPS↓
0.068
0.076
0.075
0.072
0.055
0.078
0.065
0.099
0.070
Table 7. Rendering performance comparison of RGB-D SLAM methods on Replica. Our method outperforms most of the rendering
metrics compared to existing methods. Note that Point-SLAM uses sensor depth (ground-truth depth in Replica) to guide sampling along
rays, which limits the rendering performance to existing views. The numbers for the baselines are taken from [29].
Method
Rendering FPS ↑
Rendering time
per image [s] ↓
NICE-SLAM [48]
0.54
1.85
Vox-Fusion [45]
2.17
0.46
Point-SLAM [29]
1.33
0.75
Ours
769
0.0013
Table 8. Further detail of Rendering FPS and Rendering Time
comparison based on Table 5.
Co-SLAM paper for the exact formulation (equation (6) -
(9)). All the training hyperparameters (e.g. learning rate
of the network, number of sampling points, loss weight)
are the same as Co-SLAM’s default configuration of the
Replica dataset. While Co-SLAM stores training view in-
formation by downsampling the colour and depth images,
we store the full pixel information because the number of
training views is small.
8.3.3
Testing Setup
For testing, we localise the camera pose by minimising only
the photometric error against the ground-truth colour image
of the target view.
Ours
Let the camera pose T CW ∈SE(3) and initial 3D
Gaussians Ginit, the localised camera pose T est
CW is found
by:
T est
CW = arg min
T CW
I(Ginit, T CW ) −¯Itarget

1 .
(18)
Note that Ginit is fixed during the optimisation. We ini-
tialise T CW at one of the test view’s positions, and optimi-
sation is performed for 1000 iterations. We perform this lo-
calisation process for all the test views and measure the suc-
cess rate. Camera localisation is successful if the estimated
pose converges to within 1cm of the target view within the
1000 iterations.
Method
Total Time [s]
FPS
Monocular
798.9
3.2
RGB-D
986.7
2.5
Table 9. Performance Analysis using fr3/office. Both monocular
and RGB-D implementations use multiprocessing. We report the
total execution time of our system, FPS computed by dividing
the total number of processed frames by the total time.
Method
Total Time [s]
FPS
RGB-D
1111.1
1.8
RGB-D (sp)
1904.7
1.1
Table 10. Performance Analysis using replica/office1. RGB-D
uses a multi-process implementation and RGB-D-sp is the single-
process implementation. We report the total execution time of
our system, FPS computed by dividing the total number of pro-
cessed frames by the total time.
Baseline Methods
For the baseline methods, the camera
localisation is performed by minimising colour volume ren-
dering loss Lrgb, while all the other trainable network pa-
rameters are fixed. The learning rates of the pose optimiser
are also the same as Co-SLAM’s default configuration of
Replica dataset.
9. Further Ablation Analysis (Table 3)
9.1. Pruning Ablation (Monocular input)
In Table 9.1, we report the ablation study of our proposed
Gaussian pruning, which prunes randomly initialised 3D
Gaussians effectively in a monocular SLAM setting. As the
result shows, Gaussian pruning plays a significant role in
enhancing camera tracking performance. This improvement
is primarily because, without pruning, randomly initialised
Gaussians persist in the 3D space, potentially leading to in-
correct initial geometry for other views.

<!-- page 13 -->
Input
Method
fr1/desk
fr2/xyz
fr3/office
Avg.
Mono
w/o pruning
78.2
4.5
57.0
46.6
Ours
3.78
4.60
3.50
3.96
Table 11. Pruning Ablation Study on TUM RGB-D dataset
(Monocular Input). Numbers are camera tracking error (ATE
RMSE) in cm.
Input
Method
fr1/desk
fr2/xyz
fr3/office
Avg.
RGB-D
w/o Eiso
1.60
1.42
1.32
1.43
Ours
1.50
1.44
1.49
1.47
Table 12.
Isotropic Loss Ablation Study on TUM RGB-D
dataset (RGB-D input). Numbers are camera tracking error (ATE
RMSE) in cm.
Method
r0
r1
r2
o0
o1
o2
o3
o4
Avg.
w/o Eiso
0.44
0.86
0.28
0.75
0.99
0.36
0.28
2.6
0.82
Ours
0.44
0.32
0.31
0.44
0.52
0.23
0.17
2.25
0.58
Table 13. Isotropic Loss Ablation Study on Replica dataset
(RGB-D input). Numbers are camera tracking error (ATE RMSE)
in cm.
9.2. Isotropic Loss Ablation (RGB-D input)
Table 12 and 13 report the ablation study of the effect of
isotropic loss Eiso for RGB-D input. In TUM, as Table 12
shows, isotropic regularisation does not improve the per-
formance but only shows a marginal difference. However,
for Replica, as summarised in Table 13, isotropic loss sig-
nificantly improves camera tracking performance.
Even
with the depth measurement, since rasterisation does not
consider the elongation along the viewing axis. Isotropic
regularisation is required to prevent the Gaussians from
over-stretching, especially for textureless regions, which are
common in Replica.
9.3. Effect of Spherical Harmonics (SH)
While we disabled SHs in the main paper for simplicity,
here we report the ablation study of the effect of SHs. The
3DGS paper [11] shows that addition of SH leads to small
improvements in rendering metrics, and we have found sim-
ilar improvement with SH enabled in our system (Tab.15a).
We did not observe a significant change in runtime with
SH enabled, but it notably increases Gaussian map size and
hence GPU memory usage. Though an analytical Jacobian
propagates the gradients from SH to camera poses, ATE
marginally gets worse when SH is enabled (Tab. 16), as SH
may incorrectly explain non-view directional effects caused
by the camera motion, degrading the trajectory estimate.
9.4. Mapping Performance with ORB-SLAM
One of the most straightforward approaches for real-time
operation is to combine an existing tracking system and
3DGS. In particular, frame-based SLAM methods have
been well-studied for years and is capable of providing re-
liable tracking.
In this section, we compare our unified
3DGS-based method to the combined approach. We have
01-easy
02-easy
03-medium
04-difficult
05-difficult
Point-SLAM [29]
-
-
-
-
-
Ours
0.121
0.141
2.197
4.515
3.190
Vins-Fusion [28]
0.540
0.460
0.330
0.780
0.500
SVO [6]
0.040
0.070
0.270
0.170
0.120
ORB-SLAM3 [1]
0.029
0.019
0.024
0.085
0.052
Table 14.
ATE RMSE (meter) on EuRoC Machine Hall with
Stereo Depth. Baseline numbers of classical methods are from [1].
The third best result is highlighted with a dash line.
TUM
Replica
Method
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
(a)
Ours (w/o SH)
21.89
0.733
0.327
38.94
0.968
0.0703
Ours (w. SH)
24.37
0.804
0.225
-
-
-
Point-SLAM
21.39
0.727
0.463
24.37
0.840
0.185
(b)
ORB+GS (w/o SH)
25.12
0.837
0.161
37.11
0.964
0.040
ORB+GS (w.SH)
25.44
0.842
0.146
-
-
-
Table 15. Mean Rendering metrics for TUM and Replica (RGBD).
Memory Usage for RGB-D SLAM
ATE RMSE
Ours
(w/o SH)
Ours
(w. SH)
Point-SLAM
ORB+GS
(w/o SH)
ORB+GS
(w. SH)
Ours
(w/o SH)
Ours
(w. SH)
3.97MB
11.47MB
38.0MB
45.97MB
186.5MB
1.47cm
1.56cm
Table 16. Mean Memory and ATE metrics for TUM (RGBD).
run RGB-D ORB-SLAM to recover the poses and train
3DGS with the poses and sensor depth of the keyframes,
equivalent to performing offline splatting. Though ORB-
SLAM is best in terms of ATE (Tab.1 main), we find no sig-
nificant difference across the rendering metrics (Tab.15b).
SH is omitted in the synthetic Replica dataset as it con-
tains no view-directional effects. While using an off-the-
shelf tracker with a 3DGS mapper is possible, this work has
focused on the value of the 3DGS throughout the entire al-
gorithms, which is unexplored and therefore provides new
insights. Further performance improvement of the unified
approach will be an interesting future work.
9.5. Large-scale Scenes with Stereo Inputs:
This work focuses on pioneering 3DGS-based SLAM for
live operation in small-scale scenes. However, we tested
our method on the large-scale EuRoC Machine Hall dataset
with depth from stereo (Tab.14). Fig.1 is a qualitative recon-
struction result from our system. Our method is competitive
in “easy” sequences, although performance drops for more
difficult, longer sequences.
Note that Point-SLAM [29]
fails on all sequences in this dataset. In future work, we
expect to improve our method by incorporating loop clo-
sure. In principle, loop closure will be easier to incorpo-
rate compared to other representations such as voxel grids
(where feature allocations are fixed), via a method similar
to surfel-based approaches like ElasticFusion [43].

<!-- page 14 -->
9.6. Memory Consumption and Frame Rate (Ta-
ble. 4)
9.6.1
Memory Analysis
In memory consumption analysis, for Table. 4, we mea-
sure the final size of the created Gaussians. The memory
footprint of our system is lower than the original Gaus-
sian Splatting, which uses approximately 300-700MB for
the standard novel view synthesis benchmark dataset [11],
as we only maintain well-constrained Gaussians via pruning
and do not store the spherical harmonics.
9.6.2
Timing Analysis
To analyse the processing time of our monocular/RGB-
D SLAM system, we measure the total time required to
process all frames in the TUM-RGBD fr3/office dataset.
This approach assesses the performance of our system as
a whole, rather than isolating individual components. By
adopting this approach, we gain a more realistic understand-
ing of the system’s true performance which better reflects
the real-world operating conditions, as it avoids the assump-
tion of an idealised, sequential interleaving of the tracking
and mapping processes. As shown in Table 10, our sys-
tem operates at 3.2 FPS with monocular and 2.5 FPS with
depth. The FPS is found by dividing the number of pro-
cessed frames by the total time. We conducted a similar
analysis with the Replica dataset office2. Here, we compare
the RGB-D method with and without multiprocessing. As
expected, single-process implementation takes longer as it
performs more mapping iterations.
10. Camera Pose Jacobian
Use of 3D Gaussian as a primitive and performing camera
pose optimisation is discussed in [12]; however, the method
assumes a smaller number of Gaussians and is based on ray-
intersection not splatting; hence, is not applicable to 3DGS.
While many applications of 3DGS exist, for example, dy-
namic tracking and 4D scene representation [16, 44], they
assume offline application and require accurate camera po-
sition. In contrast, we perform camera pose optimisation
by deriving the minimal analytical Jacobians on Lie group,
and for completeness, we provide the derivation of the Ja-
cobians presented in Eq. (6).
DµC
DT CW
= lim
τ→0
Exp(τ) · µC −µC
τ
(19)
= lim
τ→0
(I + τ ∧) · µC −µC
τ
(20)
= lim
τ→0
τ ∧· µC
τ
(21)
= lim
τ→0
θ×µC + ρ
τ
(22)
= lim
τ→0
−µ×
Cθ + ρ
τ
(23)
=

I
−µ×
C

(24)
where T · x is the group action of T ∈SE(3) on x ∈R3.
Simiarly, we compute the Jacobian with respect to W.
Since the translational component is not involved, we only
consider the rotational part RCW of T CW .
DW
DRCW
= lim
θ→0
Exp(θ) ◦W −W
θ
(25)
= lim
θ→0
(I + θ∧) ◦W −W
θ
(26)
= lim
θ→0
θ∧
θ ◦W
(27)
= lim
θ→0
θ×
θ ◦W
(28)
Since skew symmetric matrix is:
θ× =


0
−θz
θy
θz
0
−θx
−θy
θx
0


(29)
The partial derivative of one of the component (e.g. θx) is:
∂θ×
∂θx
=


0
0
0
0
0
−1
0
1
0

= e×
1
(30)
where e1 = [1, 0, 0]⊤, e2 = [0, 1, 0]⊤, e3 = [0, 0, 1]⊤.
∂W
∂θx
= e×
1 W =


01×3
−W3,:
W2,:


(31)
∂W
∂θy
= e×
2 W =


W3,:
01×3
−W1,:


(32)
∂W
∂θz
= e×
3 W =


−W2,:
W1,:
01×3


(33)

<!-- page 15 -->
where Wi,: refers to the ith row of the matrix.
After
column-wise vectorisation of Eq. (31), (32), (33), and stack-
ing horizontally we get:
DW
DRCW
=


−W×
:,1
−W×
:,2
−W×
:,3

,
(34)
where W:,i refers to the ith column of the matrix. Since the
translational part is all zeros, with this we get Eq. (6).
11. Additional Qualitative Results
We urge readers to view our supplementary video for con-
vincing qualitative results. In Fig. 9 - Fig. 16, we further
show additional qualitative results. We visually compare
other state-of-the-art SLAM methods using differentiable
rendering (Point-SLAM [29] and ESLAM [9]).
12. Limitation of this work
Although our novel Gaussian Splatting SLAM shows com-
petitive performance on experimental results, the method
also has several limitations.
• Currently, the proposed method is tested only on small
room-scale scenes. For larger real-world scenes, the tra-
jectory drift is inevitable. This could be addressed by in-
tegrating a loop closure module into our existing pipeline.
• Although we achieve interactive live operation, hard real-
time operation on the benchmark dataset (30 fps on TUM
sequences) is not achieved in this work.
To improve
speed, exploring a second-order optimiser would be an
interesting direction.

<!-- page 16 -->
Monocular
RGB-D
Figure 9. Novel view rendering and Gaussian visualizations on TUM fr1/desk
ESLAM
Point-SLAM
Ours (Mono)
Ours (RGBD)
GT
Figure 10. Rendering comparison on TUM fr1/desk

<!-- page 17 -->
Monocular
RGB-D
Figure 11. Novel view rendering and Gaussian visualizations on TUM fr2/xyz
ESLAM
Point-SLAM
Ours (Mono)
Ours (RGBD)
GT
Figure 12. Rendering comparison on TUM fr2/xyz

<!-- page 18 -->
Monocular
RGB-D
Figure 13. Novel view rendering and Gaussian visualizations on TUM fr3/office
ESLAM
Point-SLAM
Ours (Mono)
Ours (RGBD)
GT
Figure 14. Rendering comparison on TUM fr3/office

<!-- page 19 -->
Figure 15. Novel view rendering and Gaussian visualizations on Replica
ESLAM
Point-SLAM
Ours
GT
Figure 16. Rendering comparison on Replica

<!-- page 20 -->
References
[1] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J. G´omez, Jos´e M. M.
Montiel, and Juan D. Tard´os. ORB-SLAM3: An accurate
open-source library for visual, visual-inertial and multi-map
SLAM. IEEE Transactions on Robotics (T-RO), 37(6):1874–
1890, 2021.
[2] J. Czarnowski, T. Laidlow, R. Clark, and A. J. Davi-
son. Deepfactors: Real-time probabilistic dense monocular
SLAM. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (RAL), 5(2):
721–728, 2020.
[3] Angela Dai, Matthias Nießner, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Shahram
Izadi, and Christian Theobalt.
BundleFusion: Real-time
Globally Consistent 3D Reconstruction using On-the-fly
Surface Re-integration.
ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 36(3):24:1–24:18, 2017.
[4] Eric Dexheimer and Andrew J. Davison. Learning a Depth
Covariance Function. In Proceedings of the IEEE Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2023.
[5] J. Engel, V. Koltun, and D. Cremers. Direct sparse odom-
etry. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence (PAMI), 2017.
[6] C. Forster, M. Pizzoli, and D. Scaramuzza. SVO: Fast Semi-
Direct Monocular Visual Odometry. In Proceedings of the
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 2014.
[7] Sara Fridovich-Keil, Alex Yu, Matthew Tancik, Qinhong
Chen, Benjamin Recht, and Angjoo Kanazawa. Plenoxels:
Radiance fields without neural networks.
In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
[8] Jiahui Huang, Shi-Sheng Huang, Haoxuan Song, and Shi-
Min Hu. Di-fusion: Online implicit 3d reconstruction with
deep priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2021.
[9] M. M. Johari, C. Carta, and F. Fleuret. ESLAM: Efficient
dense slam system based on hybrid representation of signed
distance fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
[10] M. Keller, D. Lefloch, M. Lambers, S. Izadi, T. Weyrich, and
A. Kolb. Real-time 3D Reconstruction in Dynamic Scenes
using Point-based Fusion. In Proc. of Joint 3DIM/3DPVT
Conference (3DV), 2013.
[11] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis. 3D gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering.
ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 2023.
[12] Leonid Keselman and Martial Hebert. Approximate differ-
entiable rendering with algebraic surfaces. In Proceedings
of the European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV),
2022.
[13] Diederik P. Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization. In Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[14] Heng Li, Xiaodong Gu, Weihao Yuan, Luwei Yang, Zilong
Dong, and Ping Tan. Dense rgb slam with neural implicit
maps.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations (ICLR), 2023.
[15] Lingjie Liu, Jiatao Gu, Kyaw Zaw Lin, Tat-Seng Chua, and
Christian Theobalt. Neural sparse voxel fields. NeurIPS,
2020.
[16] Jonathon Luiten, Georgios Kopanas, Bastian Leibe, and
Deva Ramanan. Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking by per-
sistent dynamic view synthesis. 3DV, 2024.
[17] J. McCormac, A. Handa, A. J. Davison, and S. Leutenegger.
SemanticFusion: Dense 3D semantic mapping with convo-
lutional neural networks.
In Proceedings of the IEEE In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2017.
[18] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV), 2020.
[19] N. J. Mitra, N. Gelfand, H. Pottmann, and L. J. Guibas. Reg-
istration of Point Cloud Data from a Geometric Optimization
Perspective. In Proceedings of the Symposium on Geometry
Processing, 2004.
[20] Thomas M¨uller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexan-
der Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a mul-
tiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(TOG), 2022.
[21] R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tard´os. ORB-SLAM2: An Open-
Source SLAM System for Monocular, Stereo, and RGB-D
Cameras.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics (T-RO), 33(5):
1255–1262, 2017.
[22] R. Mur-Artal, J. M. M Montiel, and J. D. Tard´os.
ORB-
SLAM: a Versatile and Accurate Monocular SLAM System.
IEEE Transactions on Robotics (T-RO), 31(5):1147–1163,
2015.
[23] R. A. Newcombe. Dense Visual SLAM. PhD thesis, Imperial
College London, 2012.
[24] R. A. Newcombe, S. Izadi, O. Hilliges, D. Molyneaux, D.
Kim, A. J. Davison, P. Kohli, J. Shotton, S. Hodges, and A.
Fitzgibbon. KinectFusion: Real-Time Dense Surface Map-
ping and Tracking. In Proceedings of the International Sym-
posium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2011.
[25] Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, and
Andreas Geiger. Differentiable volumetric rendering: Learn-
ing implicit 3d representations without 3d supervision. In
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2020.
[26] M. Nießner, M. Zollh¨ofer, S. Izadi, and M. Stamminger.
Real-time 3D Reconstruction at Scale using Voxel Hashing.
In Proceedings of SIGGRAPH, 2013.
[27] Victor Adrian Prisacariu, Olaf K¨ahler, Ming-Ming Cheng,
Carl Yuheng Ren, Julien P. C. Valentin, Philip H. S. Torr,
Ian D. Reid, and David W. Murray. A framework for the vol-
umetric integration of depth images. CoRR, abs/1410.0925,
2014.
[28] Tong Qin, Jie Pan, Shaozu Cao, and Shaojie Shen. A general
optimization-based framework for local odometry estimation
with multiple sensors, 2019.

<!-- page 21 -->
[29] Erik Sandstr¨om, Yue Li, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R. Os-
wald. Point-slam: Dense neural point cloud-based slam. In
Proceedings of the International Conference on Computer
Vision (ICCV), 2023.
[30] Thomas Sch¨ops, Torsten Sattler, and Marc Pollefeys. Sur-
felmeshing: Online surfel-based mesh reconstruction. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence
(PAMI), 2020.
[31] Thomas Sch¨ops, Torsten Sattler, and Marc Pollefeys. Bad
slam: Bundle adjusted direct rgb-d slam.
In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
[32] J. Sol`a, J. Deray, and D. Atchuthan. A micro Lie theory for
state estimation in robotics. arXiv:1812.01537, 2018.
[33] Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik
Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J. Engel, Raul Mur-Artal,
Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, Anton Clarkson, Mingfei Yan,
Brian Budge, Yajie Yan, Xiaqing Pan, June Yon, Yuyang
Zou, Kimberly Leon, Nigel Carter, Jesus Briales, Tyler
Gillingham, Elias Mueggler, Luis Pesqueira, Manolis Savva,
Dhruv Batra, Hauke M. Strasdat, Renzo De Nardi, Michael
Goesele, Steven Lovegrove, and Richard Newcombe. The
Replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019.
[34] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cre-
mers. A Benchmark for the Evaluation of RGB-D SLAM
Systems. In Proceedings of the IEEE/RSJ Conference on In-
telligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2012.
[35] E. Sucar, S. Liu, J. Ortiz, and A. J. Davison. iMAP: Implicit
mapping and positioning in real-time. In Proceedings of the
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2021.
[36] Cheng Sun, Min Sun, and Hwann-Tzong Chen. Direct voxel
grid optimization: Super-fast convergence for radiance fields
reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
[37] Jiaxiang Tang, Jiawei Ren, Hang Zhou, Ziwei Liu, and Gang
Zeng. Dreamgaussian: Generative gaussian splatting for ef-
ficient 3d content creation. Proceedings of the International
Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024.
[38] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. DROID-SLAM: Deep Visual
SLAM for Monocular, Stereo, and RGB-D Cameras. In Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NIPS), 2021.
[39] Emanuele Vespa, Nikolay Nikolov, Marius Grimm, Luigi
Nardi, Paul HJ Kelly, and Stefan Leutenegger.
Efficient
octree-based volumetric SLAM supporting signed-distance
and occupancy mapping.
IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters (RAL), 2018.
[40] Angtian Wang, Peng Wang, Jian Sun, Adam Kortylewski,
and Alan Yuille. Voge: a differentiable volume renderer us-
ing gaussian ellipsoids for analysis-by-synthesis. 2022.
[41] Hengyi Wang, Jingwen Wang, and Lourdes Agapito. Co-
slam: Joint coordinate and sparse parametric encodings for
neural real-time slam. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
[42] T. Whelan, M. Kaess, H. Johannsson, M. F. Fallon, J. J.
Leonard, and J. B. McDonald. Real-time large scale dense
RGB-D SLAM with volumetric fusion. International Jour-
nal of Robotics Research (IJRR), 34(4-5):598–626, 2015.
[43] T. Whelan, S. Leutenegger, R. F. Salas-Moreno, B. Glocker,
and A. J. Davison. ElasticFusion: Dense SLAM without a
pose graph. In Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Sys-
tems (RSS), 2015.
[44] Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng
Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang.
4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering.
Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[45] Xingrui Yang, Hai Li, Hongjia Zhai, Yuhang Ming, Yuqian
Liu, and Guofeng Zhang. Vox-fusion: Dense tracking and
mapping with voxel-based neural implicit representation. In
Proceedings of the International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2022.
[46] Zeyu Yang, Hongye Yang, Zijie Pan, Xiatian Zhu, and Li
Zhang. Real-time photorealistic dynamic scene representa-
tion and rendering with 4d gaussian splatting. Proceedings
of the International Conference on Learning Representations
(ICLR), 2024.
[47] Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Guanjun Wu, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng
Zhang, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang. Gaussian-
dreamer: Fast generation from text to 3d gaussian splatting
with point cloud priors. Proceedings of the IEEE Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[48] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hu-
jun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R. Oswald, and Marc Polle-
feys. Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2022.
[49] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Zhaopeng Cui,
Martin R Oswald, Andreas Geiger, and Marc Pollefeys.
Nicer-slam: Neural implicit scene encoding for rgb slam. In-
ternational Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2024.
[50] M. Zwicker, H. Pfister, J. van Baar, and M. Gross.
Ewa
splatting. IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
Graphics, 8(3):223–238, 2002.
