<!-- page 1 -->
Customizable Perturbation Synthesis for
Robust SLAM Benchmarking
Xiaohao Xu1, Tianyi Zhang2†, Sibo Wang1†, Xiang Li3, Yongqi Chen1, Ye Li1,
Bhiksha Raj3, Matthew Johnson-Roberson2, and Xiaonan Huang1∗
∗Corresponding author
†Equal contribution
1 Department of Robotics, University of Michigan, Ann Arbor
2 Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
3 Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, Carnegie Mellon University
Email: {xiaohaox, xiaonanh}@umich.edu
Render 
Physics 
Engine
Global
Trajectory
Controller 
…
Local 
Trajectory 
(of each sensor)
Robot System
Clean Sensor
Streams
SLAM 
Model
Perturbed Sensor
Streams
…
…
Performance
Evaluation
Trajectory 
Perturbation
Composer
Sensor 
Perturbation
Composer
Basic modules for procedural SLAM data generation and evaluation.
Perturbation synthesis to enable SLAM evaluation under perturbation.
3D Scene 
Sensor Config.
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Fig. 1: Overview of the noisy data synthesis pipeline for SLAM evaluation under perturbation. (a) Given the customizable
robot system and global trajectory, (b) the local trajectory of each sensor can be generated via the physics engine. (c)
Subsequently, the trajectory perturbation composer introduces deviations to simulate locomotion perturbations. (d) Following
this, the render combines sensor configurations, perturbed local trajectories, and 3D scene models to generate sensor streams.
(e) Finally, the sensor perturbation composer introduces corruptions to the clean sensor streams, (f) resulting in perturbed data
for SLAM robustness benchmarking.
Abstract—Robustness is a crucial factor for the successful
deployment of robots in unstructured environments, particu-
larly in the domain of Simultaneous Localization and Map-
ping (SLAM). Simulation-based benchmarks have emerged as
a highly scalable approach for robustness evaluation compared
to real-world data collection. However, crafting a challenging
and controllable noisy world with diverse perturbations remains
relatively under-explored. To this end, we propose a novel,
customizable pipeline for noisy data synthesis, aimed at assessing
the resilience of multi-modal SLAM models against various
perturbations. This pipeline incorporates customizable hardware
setups, software components, and perturbed environments. In
particular, we introduce comprehensive perturbation taxonomy
along with a perturbation composition toolbox, allowing the
transformation of clean simulations into challenging noisy envi-
ronments. Utilizing the pipeline, we instantiate the Robust-SLAM
benchmark, which includes diverse perturbation types, to eval-
uate the risk tolerance of existing advanced multi-modal SLAM
models. Our extensive analysis uncovers the susceptibilities of
existing SLAM models to real-world disturbance, despite their
demonstrated accuracy in standard benchmarks. Our pertur-
bation synthesis toolbox, SLAM robustness evaluation pipeline,
and Robust-SLAM benchmark will be made publicly available at
https://github.com/Xiaohao-Xu/SLAM-under-Perturbation/.
Index
Terms—Simultaneous
Localization
and
Mapping
(SLAM), robot perception system, robustness benchmark.
I. INTRODUCTION
The growing prevalence of mobile robots deployed in com-
plex and dynamic environments [28, 20], i.e., noisy world,
underscores the critical need for robustness in robotic systems.
This robustness, essential for effective operation, is signifi-
cantly influenced by the robot’s ability to withstand disruptive
perturbations. Consequently, robustness evaluation in such
settings [10, 1] has emerged as a critical research area. A key
component in this domain is Simultaneous Localization and
Mapping (SLAM) [6, 11], which is fundamental to achieving
robotic autonomy. The challenge, therefore, lies in develop-
ing a comprehensive and reliable benchmark to evaluate the
robustness of SLAM systems against various disturbances.
Recent advances in SLAM system assessment have pri-
marily focused on collecting challenging datasets. These
arXiv:2402.08125v1  [cs.RO]  12 Feb 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
datasets expose SLAM systems to domain-specific environ-
mental degradation, broadening our understanding of real-
world operational challenges [38, 65, 12, 53, 78]. However,
scaling these datasets in size and diversity for holistic and
comprehensive evaluation remains a challenge due to the
inherent difficulties in data collection and labeling in the
wild. In addition, the complex interplay of environmental
factors makes isolating the impact of specific perturbations on
SLAM performance a daunting task. To overcome these limi-
tations, simulation-based benchmarks [52, 19, 10, 69, 25] have
emerged as a promising direction. They offer the advantage of
creating infinite ‘battlefields’ with greater data scalability and
diversity for survival ‘testing’ of SLAM models. Additionally,
simulation-based benchmarks allow for adaptive crafting of
more customizable and challenging scenarios, enabling the
continuous advancement of more robust SLAM systems [69].
While current simulators may not fully replicate real-world
fidelity, the rapid advancements of visual content synthesis
techniques [49, 47] are progressively bridging this gap.
Despite the increasing availability of (nearly) photo-realistic
3D scene datasets and simulators
[57, 14, 15, 79] for
SLAM evaluation, they often lack varied and controllable
disturbances. As a result, these simulations typically represent
idealized, perturbation-free environments, i.e., perfect world,
leaving the simulated perturbed environment, i.e., noisy world,
largely unexplored. To address this gap and enhance SLAM
evaluation under perturbations, we propose a comprehensive
taxonomy of perturbations in multi-modal SLAM. This en-
compasses 16 image corruption types, 4 depth corruption
types, 3 trajectory perturbation types, and the multi-sensor
misalignment effect. Based on the taxonomy, we build a
perturbation composition toolbox that can be seamlessly inte-
grated with existing simulation tools [17, 15, 57] to transform
the simulated environment from a perfect world into a more
challenging noisy world for robustness evaluation. Fig. 1
illustrates our customizable noisy data synthesis pipeline,
designed to assess the resilience of SLAM under varied
perturbations. This pipeline is adaptable to different robot
hardware configurations (e.g., sensor placement) and software
components (e.g., SLAM model). Moreover, it incorporates
both trajectory-level and sensor-level perturbations, each with
varying severity levels, to simulate robot locomotion and real-
world environmental disturbances.
Utilizing the established perturbation taxonomy and the
pipeline of noisy data synthesis, we instantiate a large-scale
Robust-SLAM benchmark. This benchmark aims to assess the
performance of existing SLAM models under a spectrum
of perturbations, offering insights into their strengths and
weaknesses. The benchmark includes both classical and neural
models, evaluated under single-modal (monocular) and multi-
modal (RGBD) input settings. Our findings indicate that while
existing advanced SLAM models excel in standard clean
SLAM benchmarks [58, 57], they exhibit vulnerabilities and
a propensity for failure when exposed to sensor-related or
trajectory-related perturbations.
Briefly put, the main contributions of this work are that it:
• proposes a comprehensive taxonomy of perturbations for
SLAM in dynamic and unstructured environments.
• introduces a noisy data synthesis pipeline, utilizing the
perturbation composition toolbox, thereby enabling cus-
tomizable SLAM robustness assessment.
• creates a large-scale dataset called Robust-SLAM, which
includes diverse perturbation types. This dataset serves to
evaluate the risk tolerance of SLAM in the presence of
various sensor corruptions and dynamic motion.
• systematically studies and analyzes the robustness of
existing SLAM models under isolated perturbation types.
The subsequent sections are organized as follows: Sec.
II reviews related work on robustness in SLAM. Sec. III
presents the assumptions and formulations in this paper. Sec.
IV introduces the pipeline for customized perturbed SLAM
benchmark synthesis and detailed perturbation taxonomies.
In Sec. V, we instantiate a robustness benchmark using our
pipeline and assess the resilience of current SLAM models
against various perturbations. Finally, Sec. VI summarizes the
study and discusses future research directions.
II. RELATED WORK
This section provides an overview of SLAM methodologies,
followed by a discussion on studies addressing corruption
robustness in perception tasks, including SLAM.
A. SLAM Methods
This overview highlights visual-related SLAM systems.
More comprehensive reviews of SLAM systems can be ob-
tained from various resources such as [6, 37, 29]. Classical
single-modal SLAM methods, like visual-only models exem-
plified by ORB-SLAM [42], have demonstrated remarkable
accuracy in ‘clean’ benchmark settings, such as TUM VI [53]
and Replica [57]. To address the complexities of real-world
environments, researchers have explored various techniques
[43, 7, 32, 50] that incorporate multi-view sensors and fuse
diverse data modalities, such as visual-inertia and RGBD.
Additionally, the development of multi-agent SLAM models
[62, 44, 70] has facilitated collaborative localization and
mapping among heterogeneous robots, showcasing improved
robustness in navigation. Furthermore, several approaches
[60, 69, 67, 59, 80, 77, 51] have utilized neural networks and
neural representations to enhance generalization capabilities
and improve the quality of 3D map reconstruction. While
these models have achieved notable improvements in accuracy,
their robustness of these models against sensor corruptions and
motion perturbations remains relatively under-explored.
B. Robustness Benchmark
To ensure the reliable deployment of mobile robots, their
perception modules must demonstrate resilience to shifts in
natural distributions [75]. A pioneering benchmark, ImageNet-
C [24], has emerged for systematically studying image cor-
ruption robustness by evaluating the performance of image
classification methods against common corruptions and pertur-
bations. Building upon this, subsequent research has expanded

<!-- page 3 -->
the scope of investigation to encompass other perception tasks.
These tasks include object detection [39, 9, 34], segmentation
[26, 71, 35], and embodied navigation [10, 72]. These studies
underscore the significance of evaluating models’ robustness to
corruptions. In SLAM, the challenges extend beyond just han-
dling image-level corruptions, like those due to camera mal-
functions. It is also crucial to account for dynamic variations
in sensor corruption and deviations in sensor transformation
simultaneously over time. These variations arise from time-
variant environmental effects and the diverse motion of robots,
respectively. In this study, we propose a comprehensive tax-
onomy of perturbations for SLAM in dynamic environments
(e.g., varying illumination) and unstructured environments
(e.g., uneven terrains that can cause locomotion deviations for
mobile robots).
C. Robustness Evaluation for SLAM
The robustness of SLAM systems is essential for their
reliable and accurate operation in dynamic and challenging
real-world environments [6]. This robustness is critical not
only to handle sensor faults, but also to ensure long-term
performance. To facilitate the robustness evaluation of SLAM
models, several datasets [53, 23, 63, 20, 78] have been
collected in degraded environments with perturbations such as
low illumination or motion blur. Furthermore, SLAMBench
[4] compares the performance of several classical SLAM
models across multiple challenging datasets and reveals the
vulnerability of these SLAM models. Considering that con-
structing real-world datasets via robot platforms for SLAM
can be challenging and unscalable, Wang et al. [68] have
utilized photo-realistic simulation environments to create a
pioneering simulated SLAM benchmark called TartanAir for
robustness evaluation. In this study, we expand the scope of
evaluation to include the robustness of multi-modal SLAM
models—encompassing both classical and neural SLAM meth-
ods—against a broader spectrum of sensor corruptions and
motion patterns (e.g., varying speed and trajectory deviations).
III. PROBLEM STATEMENT
A. Assumptions
In this work, we develop a comprehensive taxonomy of
perturbations in SLAM and conduct robustness analyses of
advanced SLAM models under the following assumptions.
Task. We focus on the standard (passive) SLAM setting,
assuming the absence of active decision-making processes.
Model. Our analysis is centered on vision-oriented SLAM sce-
narios, specifically targeting monocular and RGBD settings.
We assume the use of dense depth representation as opposed to
sparse depth data obtained from a LiDAR scanner. In addition,
the SLAM system is presumed to have known motion and
observation models.
Perturbation. Although our noisy data synthesis pipeline
is capable of generating SLAM benchmarks with multiple
heterogeneous perturbations, we deliberately concentrate on
investigating the performance degradation caused by individ-
ual sensor or trajectory perturbations. This focused approach is
designed to dissect the system’s response to isolated perturba-
tions, allowing precise quantification of their specific impacts
on SLAM performance. By analyzing the degradation induced
by individual perturbations, we can effectively assess the sys-
tem’s robustness in a controlled manner and identify the root
causes of performance degradation. This knowledge is crucial
for developing targeted mitigation strategies that address the
most vulnerable aspects, i.e., Achilles’ Heel, of the whole
SLAM system. Also, we model these perturbations using
simplified linear models (e.g., Gaussian noise assumptions), in
line with precedent set by established literature [24, 68, 10].
While these simplified perturbations may not fully capture the
complexity of real-world scenarios, they offer interpretability
and facilitate analysis across different perturbation types.
3D scene. We assume that the environment is static, meaning
there are no moving or dynamically changing objects within
the scene. Also, the scene is bounded, typically referring to
an indoor setting with predefined boundaries or limits.
B. Formulation of Standard SLAM
SLAM aims to concurrently construct a map of the scene
and estimate the pose (position and orientation) of a robot [61].
Formally, given a sequence of observations z1:t and control
inputs or motions u1:t from timestamp 1 to t, the goal is to
estimate the environmental map m (e.g., 3D occupancy or
point cloud) and the robot’s trajectory x1:t over time. Specif-
ically, the robot’s pose at a specific timestamp i (1 ≤i ≤t)
can be denoted in terms of spatial coordinates (xi, yi, zi) and
quaternion orientation (qwi, qxi, qyi, qzi), as formulated by
xi = [xi
yi
zi
qwi
qxi
qyi
qzi]
(1)
Then, the probabilistic posterior articulates our belief re-
garding the map and trajectory based on the provided obser-
vations and motions, expressed as
p(m, x1:t|z1:t, u1:t)
(2)
C. Formulation of SLAM under Perturbations
Real-world applications often encounter disturbances or
perturbations which can affect both the observations taken by
the robot’s sensors and the robot’s trajectory. In the following
paragraphs, we illustrate the high-level formulations of SLAM
under these perturbations.
Sensor-level perturbation. These corruptions introduce noise
to the robot’s sensor readings. Representing these perturbations
with δz, the altered observation model is
z′
t = zt + δz(zt)
(3)
With these sensor corruptions, the perturbed SLAM problem
can be formulated as
p(m, x1:t|z′
1:t, u1:t)
(4)

<!-- page 4 -->
Trajectory-level perturbations. These deviations affect the
estimated pose of the robot. For a pose at time t, represented
as xt = [Rt, tt] (with Rt being a rotation matrix and tt a
translation vector), we can introduce perturbations δR and δt:
x′
t = [Rt + δR, tt + δt]
(5)
With these deviations, the SLAM problem becomes
p(m, x′
1:t|z1:t, u1:t)
(6)
IV. CUSTOMIZABLE DATA SYNTHESIS
A. Pipeline Overview
Fig. 1 shows the proposed noisy data synthesis pipeline
for SLAM robustness benchmarking. The pipeline is highly
customizable and incorporates controllable perturbations to
simulate sensor noises and locomotion disturbances.
The initial phase is to configure the robot system, the
desired trajectory, and the environmental setup (see Fig. 1a).
We can optionally utilize off-the-shelf physics engines (such as
MuJoCo [64]) in conjunction with motion controllers to obtain
sensor-specific local poses (see Fig. 1b). Subsequently, these
clean trajectories can be passed to the trajectory perturbation
composer to introduce deviations to the pose, thereby better
emulating pose inaccuracy in the wild (see Fig. 1c). The ren-
der, implemented via the OpenGL [54] library, derives clean
sensor data streams conditional on the trajectory and sensor
configurations (see Fig. 1d). Sensor corruptions are introduced
into the sensor streams to mimic real-world observational
anomalies and sensor failures (see Fig. 1e). By utilizing the
generated noisy data, which encompasses perturbed sensor
streams as inputs and perturbed trajectory and 3D scene
as ground-truth labels, the robustness of SLAM models to
perturbations can be rigorously assessed (see Fig. 1f).
B. Taxonomy of Perturbations for SLAM
In Fig. 2, we present common perturbations for SLAM as
elaborated in the following paragraphs.
Sensor corruptions for RGB imaging. Prominent image
perturbations [24] (see Fig. 3) included in this study are:
• Noise-based distortions.
1) Gaussian noise. Consider an original clean image
denoted by I. To simulate the presence of Gaussian
noise, we introduce additive noise η to create a
corrupted version of the image I′, expressed as
I′ = I + η
(7)
where the noise η is sampled from a Gaussian distri-
bution with zero mean and variance σ2, represented
as η ∼N(0, σ2).
2) Shot noise. Shot noise is associated with the random
arrival of photons or particles during the image
capture process. It can be modeled using a Poisson
distribution [22].
(b) Original Trajectory
Faster Motion
Translation Deviation
Rotation Deviation
(e) Sensor Misalignment
S1
S1
S1
S1
S2
S2
S2
S2
Correct 
Alignment
Wrong 
Alignment
Pose
(a) Original Sensor Stream
(c) Sensor Corruption
t
Dynamic Perturbation Mode
Static Perturbation Mode
t
Perturbation Severity
(No)              Low             Mid              High
(d) Trajectory Deviation
S1
S2
Sensor 
Stream
Fig. 2: Taxonomy of perturbations for SLAM. Given (a)
the original (clean) sensor stream and (b) trajectory, our
noisy data synthesis pipeline enables the simulation of (c)
sensor corruption (for both RGB images and depth maps), (d)
trajectory perturbations, and (e) multi-sensor misalignment for
the multi-modal input setting.
3) Impulse noise. For impulse noise, random pixels
of the original image I are set to extreme values
(e.g., either min or max of the RGB values) with a
certain probability p. The perturbation process for
each pixel at the location (x, y) can be expressed as
I′(x, y) =





min value
with probability p/2
max value
with probability p/2
I(x, y)
otherwise
(8)
4) Speckle noise. Speckle noise [2] can be represented
as a multiplicative noise model:
I′ = I × (1 + ρ × η)
(9)
where ρ controls the intensity level of the speckle
noise, and η represents the noise term following a
Gaussian distribution.
• Blur-based effects. The blurring process involves con-
volving (∗) an input image I with a specific blur kernel
K to obtain the blurred image I′, which is formulated as
I′ = I ∗K
(10)
1) Defocus blur. This effect simulates the out-of-focus
visuals caused by camera lens properties. It can
be modeled by convolving the input image with a
circular disc (bokeh) kernel.
2) Glass blur. Emulating the appearance of viewing
through textured or patterned glass, this effect adds
complexity to the blurring process. The glass texture
is approximated using an irregular kernel.

<!-- page 5 -->
Brightness
Contrast
Defocus Blur
Gaussian Noise
Gaussian Blur
Glass Blur
Fog Effect
Frost Effect
Spatter Effect
Pixelate
Motion Blur
Shot Noise
Impulse Noise
Speckle Noise
Snow Effect
Jpeg Compression
Fig. 3: Taxonomy of sensor-level perturbations for RGB imaging. We consider 16 common image corruption types [24]
from 4 main categories of perturbations for SLAM robustness evaluation: 1) noise-based distortions: Gaussian noise, shot
noise, impulse noise, and speckle noise; 2) blur-based effects: defocus blur, glass blur, motion blur, and Gaussian blur;
3) environmental interferences: snow effect, frost effect, fog effect, and spatter effect; 4) post-processing manipulations:
brightness, contrast, pixelate, and JPEG compression.
3) Motion blur. Rapid movement during image cap-
ture, either by the camera or objects in the scene,
results in motion blur. This effect can be represented
by convolving the image with a linear kernel ori-
ented in the direction of motion.
4) Gaussian blur. Gaussian blur convolves the image
with a Gaussian kernel. The standard deviation of
the Gaussian distribution determines the level of
blurring.
• Environmental interference. Environmental interference
or weather effects [27, 73] are commonly simulated via
alpha blending techniques [55]. This involves blending a
perturbed weather effect layer W with the original (clean)
image I to generate a composite perturbed image I′,
which can be expressed as
I′ = (1 −αW ) × I + αW × W
(11)
where αW controls the blending proportion.
1) Snow effect. To simulate the disturbances caused
by snowfall, we construct a snow effect layer with
random regional white values [66].
2) Frost effect. The frost effect introduces a semi-
transparent whitening overlay on the image [39].
This effect is modeled through a weighted combina-
tion of the original image and the whitened version
of the original image.
3) Fog effect. The fog effect results in a hazy observa-
tion. A simplified model [24] to simulate this effect
is achieved through linear interpolation between the
original image and a constant gray-value image.
4) Spatter effect. The spatter effect mimics the appear-
ance of droplets on a lens or window. To achieve
this effect, a layer comprising semi-transparent dark
spots or streaks is blended with the image. Consider-
ing the local property of the spatters, we incorporate
a hard mask onto the spatter effect layer. This mask
designates transparent regions as 0 and perturbed
(occupied) regions as 1, thereby controlling the
visibility of the spatter effect in specific areas.
• Post-processing manipulations.
1) Brightness. This effect adjusts the global luminance
of the image. For every pixel (x, y) in image I, an
brightness offset b is added:
I′(x, y) = I(x, y) + b
(12)
2) Contrast. This effect alters the tone variance of the
image by linear scaling about the mean intensity J :
I′ = α × (I −J ) + J
(13)
where α controls the contrast level.
3) JPEG compression. This effect simulates lossy
compression artifacts when using the JPEG image
compression standard.
4) Pixelate. This effect reduces resolution by dividing
the image into blocks and setting all pixels in each
block to the block’s average value.
Sensor corruption for depth imaging. As shown in Fig. 4, we
propose a set of generic depth perturbation operations designed
specifically for depth images.
• Gaussian noise. This perturbation mimics sensor random
noise η, which follows Gaussian distribution, in depth
measurement. Let D be the original depth map and D′
be the perturbed depth map, then each pixel (x, y) in the
depth map is perturbed as
D′(x, y) = D(x, y) + η
(14)
• Edge erosion. The multi-path interference effect of cer-
tain depth sensors (e.g., time-of-flight sensors) can lead
to inaccurate depth measurements, particularly for regions
with complex geometries. To simulate this perturbation,
we first leverage the edge detection algorithm to obtain
the edges and then remove a subset of edge pixels P:
D′(x, y) =
(
VOID
if (x, y) ∈P
D(x, y)
otherwise
(15)
• Random missing depth data. This perturbation intro-
duces random masked regions to simulate occlusions or
missing depth data. Specifically, a binary mask M is

<!-- page 6 -->
RGB Image
Original Clean Depth
Depth + Gaussian Noise
Depth + Random Missing
Depth + Edge Erosion
Depth + Range Clipping
:  Regions in dark red are masked out or out of sensor range.
Fig. 4: Taxonomy of sensor-level perturbations for depth
imaging. We introduce four perturbations to mimic the percep-
tion noises (i.e., random noises and missing) and the limited
perception field of depth sensors.
Faster Motion
Effect (2×)
Original
(Clean) 
Rotation 
(3°)
Translation
Deviation 
(0.025m)
ATE RMSE:
 0.1247
ATE RMSE:
 0.7970
Rotation
Deviation 
(1°)
ATE RMSE:
 0.6656
ATE RMSE:
 0.8697
Translation
Deviation 
(0.0125m)
ATE RMSE:
 0.2077
ATE RMSE:
 0.2704
Estimated Trajectory
Ground-truth Trajectory
Rotation
Deviation 
(3°)
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
-4.5 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
1.00
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
1.00
-4.0
-3.0
-2.0
-1.0
0.0
-0.5
Fig. 5: Taxonomy of trajectory deviation and faster mo-
tion perturbation. We present the synthesized ground-truth
trajectories (in black) and the estimated trajectories (in blue)
obtained using the real-time SLAM model CO-SLAM [67].
For clarity, we visualize the projected trajectory on the hori-
zontal x-y plane derived from the 3D trajectory, which shows
that slight trajectory deviations can have a significant impact
on the trajectory estimation performance, measured by ATE.
applied to the depth map, where the masked regions are
set to a void value (e.g., 0):
D′ = D ⊙M
(16)
where ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication.
• Range clipping. This perturbation accounts for the lim-
ited depth coverage of real-world depth sensors. Objects
beyond this range will appear as missing data in the
depth image. Specifically, any depth value D(x, y) falling
outside a specified range [Dmin, Dmax] is replaced with
a predefined value V (e.g., a void value which represents
depth missing), expressed as
D′(x, y) =
(
D(x, y)
if Dmin ≤D(x, y) ≤Dmax
V
otherwise
(17)
Trajectory perturbations. As is shown in Fig. 5, we study
three types of trajectory perturbations: rotational and transla-
tional matrix deviations, and faster motion effects.
• Rotation deviation. This perturbation induces rotational
inconsistencies within a trajectory. By applying the rota-
tion matrix perturbation, denoted as ∆R, the perturbed
rotation matrix R′ is obtained. This process can be
formulated as
R′ = R∆R
(18)
• Translation deviation. This perturbation induces transla-
tion inconsistencies within a trajectory. By adding the per-
turbation translation vector ∆t to the original translation
vector t, the perturbed translation vector t′ is obtained.
This process can be formulated as
t′ = t + ∆t
(19)
For our implementation, both perturbations are sampled
from Gaussian distribution.
• Faster motion. Given an existing sensor stream sequence
S, a sequence with faster motion (S′) can be synthesized
by sampling (S) frames with an interval k:
S′ = S(S, k)
(20)
Multi-sensor misalignment. Sensor delays can be emulated
by introducing a temporal misalignment between the data
streams. Given two temporally-aligned sensor streams, i.e.,
S1(t) and S2(t), a misalignment time delay ∆tm is introduced
to create misaligned perturbed sensor streams, i.e., S′
1(t) and
S′
2(t), which is formulated as
S′
1(t) = S1(t + ∆tm)
(21)
S′
2(t) = S2(t)
(22)
C. Perturbation Mode and Severity
As is illustrated in Fig. 2c, perturbations are examined in
two key modes: static and dynamic. In addition, the severity
of each perturbation can be categorized into varied levels, e.g.,
low, medium, and high.
Static perturbation. The severity level of static perturbations
remains constant across all sensor frames in a sequence.
Dynamic perturbation. Dynamic perturbations exhibit vary-
ing severity from frame to frame, closely resembling real-
world disturbances.

<!-- page 7 -->
TABLE I: Comparison of SLAM benchmarks.
Benchmark
Seq Num
Trajectory
Sensor
Perturbation
Real-world SLAM Benchmark
EuRoC [5]
11
UAV
RGB+IMU
Entangled,
Natural
KITTI [21]
22
Car
RGB+IMU+Lidar
Malaga [3]
15
Car
RGB+IMU
Newer College [74]
3
Handheld
RGB +Lidar+IMU
PennCOSYVIO [45]
4
Handheld
RGB+IMU
TUM-RGBD [58]
19
Handheld+UGV
RGB+Depth
TUM VIO [53]
28
Handheld
RGB+IMU
UMA VI [81]
32
Handheld
RGB+IMU
UMich [8]
27
UGV
RGB+IMU
UZH-FPV [16]
28
UAV
RGBD&Event+IMU
Hilti [23]
12
Handheld
RGB+Lidar+IMU
Campus-Hybrid [63]
3
UGV
RGB+Lidar+IMU
Synthesized SLAM Benchmark
Replica [57]
8
Simulation
RGB+Depth
No
TartanAir∗[68]
30
Simulation
RGB
Decoupled,
30 settings
Robust-SLAM† (Ours)
1,000
Simulation
RGB+Depth
Decoupled,
172 settings
This table is extended from [23]. ‘Seq Num’ indicates sequence number.
* Though TartanAir collects diverse 3D scenes, its pioneering case study only
benchmarks the performance under 30 simulated sequences [68].
† While our proposed perturbed data synthesizer can enable infinite dataset generation,
we create a dataset with limited sequence number here for preliminary analyses.
V. CUSTOMIZABLE ROBUSTNESS BENCHMARK
Leveraging our established noisy data synthesis pipeline,
we instantiate Robust-SLAM, a large-scale benchmark de-
signed for the robustness evaluation of cutting-edge monocular
and multi-modal SLAM models under diverse perturbations.
Robust-SLAM consists of an extensive collection of 1,000
sequences, containing nearly 2 million RGBD frames at a
resolution of 1200×680 pixels. Ground-truth trajectories and
3D scenes are also provided for evaluation. In the following
sections, we delve into the details of Robust-SLAM benchmark
and evaluate the performance of some advanced monocular
and multi-modal SLAM models under perturbation.
A. Benchmark Construction
Benchmark base 3D scene selection details. We synthesize
the perturbed benchmark using 3D scene models sourced from
the Replica dataset [57], which comprises real 3D scans of
indoor scenes. We select the same set of eight rooms and
offices as the (clean) Replica SLAM dataset rendered by
iMAP [59] for consistent comparison.
Benchmark perturbation generation details. We compose
a diverse set of perturbations using our noisy data synthesis
pipeline. 1) For sensor perturbations, we utilize the same
trajectory as [59] to render clean sensor streams, and then
introduce perturbations for each frame. For the perturbation
severity of RGB images, we follow the severity used for
the most prevalent image robustness benchmark [24]; for the
perturbation severity of depth maps, we refer to the depth
range and distribution in real-world dataset TUM-RGBD [53]
to set up the hyper-parameters. 2) For trajectory perturbations,
we perturb the original trajectories in [59] by introducing
additional translation and orientation deviations. 3) To simulate
faster motion, we down-sample sensor streams from the clean
source by 2, 4, and 8 times. 4) To mimic sensor stream
misalignment, we introduce frame delay (5, 10, and 20 frames)
between RGB and depth sensor streams. Please refer to the
appendix for more details.
Comparison with existing benchmarks. As shown in Table I,
we highlight the superiority of our synthesized benchmark, i.e.,
Robust-SLAM, in two aspects:
• Isolation of perturbations. Real-world datasets often
contain multiple entangled corruptions, making it difficult
to discern the impact of individual corruptions. In con-
trast, our benchmark allows for controllable evaluation of
SLAM robustness under isolated perturbations.
• Diversity and scale. Compared to existing simulated
SLAM benchmarks, such as Replica [57] and Tar-
tanAir [68], our benchmark offers more diverse pertur-
bation types at a large scale (172 perturbation settings).
Moreover, our benchmark is large-scale in total sequence
number (1,000 long video sequences and nearly 2 million
image-depth pairs), which allows for statistically signifi-
cant evaluation of SLAM algorithms.
B. Benchmarking Methods
Existing pioneering robustness evaluation for SLAM [68, 4]
only considers classical SLAM models which mostly lever-
age heuristic map representation. In contrast, our benchmark
considers more advanced multi-modal SLAM models and
neural-based models. Specifically, Table II presents the eval-
uated SLAM models: 1) classical SLAM: we choose the
prevalent and advanced model ORB-SLAM3 [7]; 2) neural-
based SLAM, comprising iMAP [59], Nice-SLAM [80], CO-
SLAM [67], GO-SLAM [77], and SplaTAM-S [30]. The
hyperparameters are set based on the recommendations given
in the original papers or use default settings otherwise.
C. Evaluation Metrics
Absolute trajectory error (ATE) of trajectory estimation.
To evaluate the accuracy of trajectory estimation, we adopt
the widely-used ATE metric, which measures the disparity be-
tween the estimated trajectory and the ground truth trajectory.
Formally, the ATE metric is calculated as:
ATE =
v
u
u
t 1
N
N
X
i=1
|pest
i
−pgt
i |2.
(23)
Here, pest
i
represents the estimated position, pgt
i represents the
corresponding ground truth position, and N denotes the trajec-
tory frame number. Lower ATE indicates better performance.
For the classical SLAM model ORBSLAM3 [7] that stops
predicting subsequent frames after losing track, we follow
previous literature [68, 7] to calculate ATE using the tracked
partial trajectory. For neural SLAM models evaluated in this
study (included iMAP, Nice-SLAM, CO-SLAM, GO-SLAM,
and SplaTAM-S), we follow the literature [59, 80, 67, 30, 77]
to calculate ATE on the full trajectory. Additionally, we utilize
the mean and maximum ATE across multiple perturbation

<!-- page 8 -->
TABLE II: SLAM methods for robustness evaluation(1).
Method
Type
Modality
Mono/RGBD
Map Representation
Loop
Closure
External
Data
Speed(3)
Processing
Year
ORB-SLAM3 [7]
Classical, Sparse
/
Keyframe+ORB, Explicit
Real-time
CPU
2020
iMAP [59]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based(2), Implicit
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2021
Nice-SLAM [80]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based, Implicit
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2022
CO-SLAM [67]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based, Implicit
Real-time
CPU+GPU
2023
GO-SLAM [77]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based, Implicit
(4)
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2023
SplaTAM-S [30]
Neural, Dense
/
Gaussian [31], Explicit
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2023
(1) We only select several representative multi-modal SLAM models with varied characteristics for evaluation in this work.
(2) ‘NeRF-based’ indicates methods that leverage implicit neural networks to encode the 3D scene, following the philosophy of NeRF [51].
(3) For the speed comparison, ‘Real-time’ and ‘Quasi Real-time’ are in the speed decreasing rank.
(4) GO-SLAM initializes the model parameters from the DROID-SLAM model [60] which leverages external data [68] for model pre-training.
TABLE III: Trajectory estimation error (ATE↓[m]) under static (Top) and dynamic (Bottom) image perturbations.
Method
Clean
Perturbed
Blur Effect
Noise Effect
Environmental Interference
Post-processing Effect
Mean
Max
Motion Defocus Gaussian Glass Gaussian
Shot
Impulse Speckle
Fog
Frost
Snow Spatter Bright Contra.
Jpeg
Pixelate
Static Perturbation Mode for Monocular SLAM Models
ORBSLAM3 [7] 0.0145 0.750F 1.000F 0.891F 0.535F
0.505F 0.797F 0.917F 0.969F 1.000F 0.923F 0.629F 0.917F 1.000F 0.719F 0.0265 0.612F 0.7949 0.768F
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0039 0.0903 0.7207 0.0151 0.0052
0.0052
0.0089
0.0776
0.0456
0.0296
0.0190 0.2157 0.7207 0.1921 0.0859 0.0046 0.0047 0.0095 0.0046
Static Perturbation Mode for RGBD SLAM Models
ORBSLAM3 [7] 0.0823 0.472F 0.9317 0.300F 0.340F
0.292F 0.211F 0.470F 0.433F 0.591F 0.351F 0.397F 0.640F 0.795F 0.508F 0.0649 0.527F 0.9317 0.7034
iMAP [59]
0.1209 0.1568 0.3831 0.1424 0.1671
0.1811
0.0672
0.0278
0.0779 0.1710 0.1087 0.1913 0.1316 0.1665 0.1473 0.1903 0.3831 0.1884 0.1669
Nice-SLAM [80] 0.0147 0.0253 0.0654 0.0307 0.0151
0.0161
0.0188
0.0254
0.0377 0.0353 0.0151 0.0186 0.0160 0.0323 0.0320 0.0654 0.0161 0.0150 0.0145
CO-SLAM [67]
0.0090 0.0104 0.0125 0.0115 0.0096
0.0097
0.0097
0.0125
0.0101 0.0099 0.0105 0.0118 0.0113 0.0104 0.0098 0.0103 0.0112 0.0094 0.0094
GO-SLAM [77] 0.0046 0.0574 0.6271 0.0135 0.0052
0.0052
0.0090
0.0169
0.0140 0.0171 0.0100 0.1211 0.6271 0.0416 0.0164 0.0047 0.0054 0.0065 0.0050
SplaTAM-S [30] 0.0045 0.0062 0.0160 0.0160 0.0052
0.0049
0.0048
0.0054
0.0050
0.0044
0.0051 0.0085 0.0063 0.0048 0.0051 0.0038 0.0133 0.0044 0.0048
Survival Upper-bound: The highest expected performance (min ATE) attainable using all monocular and RGBD SLAM models.
min ATE
0.0039 0.0056
0.0115 0.0115 0.0052
0.0049
0.0048
0.0054
0.0050 0.0044 0.0051 0.0085 0.0063 0.0048 0.0051 0.0038 0.0054 0.0044 0.0046
mean(min ATE)
0.0066
0.0066
0.0050
0.0062
0.0046
Dynamic Perturbation Mode for Monocular SLAM Models
ORBSLAM3 [7] 0.0145 0.827F 1.000F 0.925F 0.506F
0.760F 0.813F 1.000F 1.000F 1.000F 0.885F 0.751F 1.000F 1.000F 1.000F 0.0517 1.000F 0.8276 0.718F
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0039 0.0933 0.7395 0.0155 0.0065
0.0060
0.0090
0.0509
0.0253
0.0396
0.0158 0.2668 0.7395 0.2254 0.0474 0.0066 0.0050 0.0298 0.0044
Dynamic Perturbation Mode for RGBD SLAM Models
ORBSLAM3 [7] 0.0823 0.497F 1.000F 0.279F 0.303F
0.0515
0.1680
0.508F 0.513F 0.755F 0.262F 0.659F 0.256F 0.876F 0.753F 0.0660 0.751F 1.000F 0.756F
iMAP [59]
0.1209 0.1756 0.2873 0.1243 0.1042
0.2149
0.1221
0.1354
0.1170 0.1967 0.1576 0.2279 0.2873 0.2412 0.1528 0.2141 0.2576 0.1607 0.0955
Nice-SLAM [80] 0.0147 0.0214 0.0409 0.0157 0.0252
0.0359
0.0211
0.0288
0.0409 0.0146 0.0155 0.0167 0.0211 0.0197 0.0187 0.0206 0.0155 0.0146 0.0170
CO-SLAM [67]
0.0090 0.0105 0.0117 0.0107 0.0095
0.0115
0.0093
0.0106
0.0103 0.0102 0.0098 0.0117 0.0116 0.0111 0.0109 0.0106 0.0111 0.0095 0.0097
GO-SLAM [77] 0.0046 0.0363 0.2213 0.0130 0.0057
0.0055
0.0078
0.0185
0.0117 0.0139 0.0098 0.1685 0.2213 0.0637 0.0166 0.0051 0.0052 0.0092 0.0049
SplaTAM-S [30] 0.0045 0.008G 0.045G 0.0191 0.0053
0.0052
0.0050
0.0058
0.0072
0.0044
0.0067 0.0062 0.0062 0.045G 0.0041 0.0054 0.0096 0.0046 0.0045
Survival Upper-bound: The highest expected performance (min ATE) is attainable using all monocular and RGBD SLAM models.
min ATE
0.0039 0.0061
0.0111 0.0107 0.0053
0.0052
0.0050
0.0058
0.0072 0.0044 0.0067 0.0062 0.0062 0.0111 0.0041 0.0051 0.0050 0.0046 0.0044
mean(min ATE)
0.0069
0.0066
0.0060
0.0069
0.0048
1) As ORBSLAM3 [7] stops predicting on subsequent frames after losing track, we follow previous literature [68, 7] to calculate the ATE score on tracked partial trajectory.
2) For neural SLAM models (iMAP, Nice-SLAM, CO-SLAM, GO-SLAM, and SplaTAM-S), we follow the literature [59, 80, 67, 30, 77] to calculate ATE on the full trajectory.
3) F and G represent settings that include failure sequences where no final trajectory is generated. Specifically, F denotes the failure is caused by tracking loss, while G denotes
the failure is due to running out of GPU memory (more than 48GB). The number in front of F and G represents the average ATE as failure sequences are set as a value of 1.0.
4) We highlight the best trajectory estimation performance, i.e., the lowest ATE, among different methods under each setting in bold.
settings of each model to measure the expected average
performance and worst-case performance, respectively.
Success rate (SR) of pose tracking. Considering the limi-
tations of the widely-used ATE metric in evaluating SLAM
performance when only a partial trajectory is tracked [68],
especially for classical SLAM models like ORBSLAM3, we
leverage the SR metric to evaluate pose tracking performance.
SR is defined as the ratio of the cumulative sum of Euclidean
distances between consecutive estimated poses to the cumula-
tive sum of Euclidean distances between consecutive ground
truth poses. Formally, the SR metric is defined as:
SR =
PN
i=1 ||pest
i
−pest
i−1||
PN
i=1 ||pgt
i −pgt
i−1||
(24)
where ||·|| denotes the Euclidean distance. A higher SR value
indicates better trajectory tracking performance.
We also use the mean and minimum SR across multiple
perturbation settings to quantify the expected average perfor-
mance and worst-case performance, respectively.

<!-- page 9 -->
TABLE IV: Success rate (SR↑) of pose tracking under image perturbations for ORBSLAM3 [7].
Perturb.
Input
Clean
Perturbed
Blur Effect
Noise Effect
Environmental Interference
Post-processing Effect
Mode
Modality
Mean
Min
Motion Defocus Gaussian
Glass
Gaussian
Shot
Impulse Speckle
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter Bright Contra. JPEG Pixelate
Static
Mono
0.854
0.220
0.000
0.059
0.331
0.382
0.122
0.055
0.016
0.000
0.052
0.229
0.057
0.000
0.211
0.915
0.320
0.712
0.064
±0.149 ±0.265 ±0.000 ±0.152 ±0.385
±0.415 ±0.307
±0.186 ±0.076 ±0.000 ±0.183 ±0.362 ±0.197 ±0.000 ±0.352 ±0.142 ±0.405 ±0.349 ±0.089
RGBD
0.960
0.460
0.081
0.621
0.606
0.617
0.778
0.388
0.391
0.219
0.443
0.276
0.111
0.081
0.259
0.971
0.412
0.818
0.361
±0.046 ±0.256 ±0.236 ±0.423 ±0.443
±0.430 ±0.319
±0.468 ±0.475 ±0.409 ±0.457 ±0.421 ±0.282 ±0.236 ±0.405 ±0.030 ±0.461 ±0.284 ±0.232
Dynamic
Mono
0.854
0.153
0.000
0.008
0.267
0.158
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.096
0.169
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.904
0.000
0.703
0.142
±0.149 ±0.270 ±0.000 ±0.022 ±0.320
±0.315 ±0.000
±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.273 ±0.315 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.046 ±0.000 ±0.328 ±0.168
RGBD
0.960
0.323
0.000
0.871
0.354
0.301
0.991
0.207
0.277
0.040
0.303
0.027
0.005
0.000
0.009
0.975
0.003
0.376
0.432
±0.046 ±0.344 ±0.000 ±0.364 ±0.429
±0.437 ±0.081
±0.378 ±0.473 ±0.084 ±0.441 ±0.045 ±0.009 ±0.000 ±0.026 ±0.027 ±0.007 ±0.519 ±0.218
Results are presented with mean±standard deviation. We highlight the best performance, i.e., the highest SR, under static and dynamic perturbation mode, respectively, in bold.
No perturbation interquartile range (for reference)
No perturbation interquartile range (for reference)
9 types shows statistically significant
(p-value<0.01) performance degradation
12 types shows statistically significant
(p-value<0.01) performance degradation
Fig. 6: Effect of each image perturbation type on the trajectory estimation performance, measured via ATE in the logarithm
form, across (a) static and (b) dynamic perturbation mode for SplaTAM-S [30] model, which shows the best robustness under
image-level corruption among all the benchmark methods. The t-test [33] is performed to compare the performance distribution
between each perturbed setting and the perturbation-free setting (which is denoted as None in the last column of each sub-figure).
∗∗and ∗indicate a significant distribution difference between the pair at the 0.01 and 0.05 significance level, respectively.
D. Benchmarking Results
This section presents the findings of our comprehensive
Robust-SLAM benchmark, offering insights into the robustness
of existing SLAM models across diverse perturbations. To
ensure reliability, the values presented in the following tables
represent averages obtained from multiple runs across multiple
scenes. In addition, for each perturbed setting conducted under
the dynamic perturbation mode, we performed three separate
runs to minimize the impact of randomness.
Sensor perturbation on RGB imaging. We analyze the
effect of image-level perturbations in Table III, categorized
mainly by the input modality (monocular versus RGBD) and
the perturbation mode (static versus dynamic). In Table III,
the notations F and G represent settings that include failure
sequences where no final trajectory is generated. F represents
failure caused by tracking loss, while G denotes failure due
to GPU memory exhaustion (≥48GB). We assign an ATE
value of 1.0 to these failure sequences and calculate the
mean performance for each setting. In addition, we present
the success ratio of tracked trajectory for ORBSLAM3 in
Table IV. We offer the following analyses and insights:
Which perturbation mode is more detrimental: static or
dynamic? Dynamic perturbations present a greater challenge
compared to static mode. This is true both in terms of com-
paring the performance of individual models when perturbed
and in determining the overall highest expected performance.
The latter is referred to as the ‘survival upper bound’, derived
from all models. The obvious performance degradation caused
by perturbations in the dynamic mode highlights the increased
difficulty of handling real-time dynamic visual disturbances.
As SplaTAM-S model shows the highest robustness when
compared to other advanced SLAM models, we further investi-
gate the effect of each image perturbation on its performance
in Fig. 6. The results reveal that the dynamic perturbation
mode causes a more substantial degradation in trajectory
estimation performance. Specifically, among the 12 types of
perturbations tested, a statistically significant difference exists
in the distribution of perturbed ATE compared to the scenario
without any perturbation, as shown in Fig. 6b. In contrast,

<!-- page 10 -->
under the static perturbation mode, nine types of perturbations
lead to statistically significant performance degradation, as
shown in Fig. 6a. It is noteworthy that an increase in brightness
results in a slight reduction in trajectory error under static
perturbation for SplaTAM-S model, but leads to a large error
under the dynamic perturbation mode.
Which type of SLAM model exhibits greater robustness:
classical or neural-based? Most neural SLAM models typi-
cally demonstrate greater robustness to image-level perturba-
tions than classical models. This is attributed to the learning-
based components in neural SLAM models, which enhance
their adaptability. However, the classical SLAM model we
examined, specifically ORBSLAM3, sometimes completely
loses tracking when the detection of ORB features becomes
impossible in a perturbed image (i.e., SR = 0 in Table IV).
Which modality configuration yields greater robustness:
monocular or RGBD? RGBD SLAM systems generally sur-
pass monocular methods in terms of robustness. This enhanced
robustness can be attributed to the incorporation of (nearly
clean) depth information, which provides additional resilience
against appearance changes.
What is the most robust model under image perturba-
tion? Among all the competitive SLAM methods evaluated,
SplaTAM-S emerges as the most robust model in terms
of the ATE after perturbations. It consistently achieves the
lowest trajectory error across a range of perturbed conditions
for both static and dynamic perturbation modes. However,
as depicted in Fig. 6, the performance of SplaTAM-S still
encounters challenges in dynamic settings. Specifically, 12 out
of 16 image-level perturbations result in statistically significant
performance degradation for the SplaTAM-S model.
Which perturbation types have the most significant im-
pact? Environmental effects induce the largest errors, high-
lighting the substantial challenge of deploying SLAM under
adverse weather conditions. Motion blur also largely degrades
the performance of most advanced SLAM methods.
Which perturbation types have the least significant im-
pact? Perturbations introduced during post-processing, such as
image compression and degradation artifacts, generally exert
a relatively minor influence on SLAM performance.
Sensor perturbation on depth imaging. In Table V, we inves-
tigate the impact of depth perturbations. 1) When faced with
partial depth missing perturbations (including random depth
value missing, edge erosion, and range clipping), most neural-
based SLAM models exhibit minimal degradation owing to
their effective pixel-wise optimization mechanism. In contrast,
for the classical SLAM model ORBSLAM3, we observed a
notable trajectory estimation performance degradation in the
presence of depth-related perturbations. In addition, as shown
in Table VI, ORBSLAM3 model demonstrates a significant
loss of track when faced with depth missing. 2) Compared to
missing depth data, the impact of introducing Gaussian noise
to the depth maps is more noticeable. Except for SplaTAM-
S, all methods show a considerable increase in trajectory
estimation error, attributed to noise directly interfering with
TABLE V: Trajectory estimation error (ATE↓[m]) under depth
perturbation for RGBD SLAM methods.
Method
Clean
Gaussian
Edge
Random
Range
Noise
Erosion
Missing
Clipping
ORBSLAM3 [7]
0.0823
0.8026
0.8070
0.7556
0.9940
iMAP [59]
0.1209
0.0307
0.1083
0.2438
Nice-SLAM [80] 0.0147
0.0149
0.0154
0.1183
CO-SLAM [67]
0.0090
0.5794
0.0096
0.0094
0.0122
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0046
0.0378
0.0046
0.0046
0.0045
SplaTAM-S [30]
0.0045
0.0042
0.0046
0.0042
0.0043
indicates completely unacceptable trajectory estimation performance,
i.e., ATE ≥1.0 [m]. Models with the best performance are in bold
TABLE VI: Success rate (SR↑) of pose tracking under depth
perturbation for ORBSLAM3 [7] with RGBD input.
Clean
Gaussian
Edge
Random
Range
Noise
Erosion
Missing
Clipping
0.960 ± 0.046 0.421 ± 0.331 0.379 ± 0.281 0.322 ± 0.354 0.286 ± 0.181
Results are presented with mean±standard deviation.
TABLE VII: Trajectory estimation error (ATE↓[m]) of mono
(Top) and RGBD (Bottom) SLAM under faster motion.
Speed-up Ratio
1×
2×
4×
8×
ORBSLAM3 [7]
0.0145
0.0085
0.0230
0.0231
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0039
0.0042
0.0046
0.0048
ORBSLAM3 [7]
0.0823
0.0186
0.0637
0.0774
iMAP [59]
0.1209
0.4675
0.9445
Nice-SLAM [80]
0.0147
0.1702
CO-SLAM [67]
0.0090
0.1062
0.9510
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0046
0.0046
0.0046
0.0050
SplaTAM-S [30]
0.0045
0.0184
1) Notice that the sensor stream under faster motion effect is synthesized
by downsampling the original sensor stream. Thus, the derived sensor stream
under faster motion is shorter than the original one.
2)
indicates completely unacceptable trajectory estimation performance,
i.e., ATE ≥1.0 [m]. Models with the best performance are in bold
TABLE VIII: Success rate (SR↑) of pose tracking under faster
motion perturbation for ORBSLAM3 [7].
Speed-up Ratio
1×
2×
4×
8×
Monocular
0.854 ± 0.149 0.893 ± 0.081 0.909 ± 0.049 0.837 ± 0.115
RGBD
0.960 ± 0.046 0.964 ± 0.012 0.938 ± 0.029 0.866 ± 0.129
1) Results are presented with mean±standard deviation.
2) We highlight the best performance, i.e., the highest SR, for each severity
level of faster motion effect in bold.
the depth distribution of observations.
Faster motion perturbation. In Table VII and Table VIII,
we evaluate the effect of faster motion perturbation, revealing
the limitations of most approaches in achieving acceptable
performance at high speeds. Notably, GO-SLAM excels in
handling faster motion scenarios, thanks to the integration of
global bundle adjustment mechanism. Besides, the classical
SLAM model ORBSLAM3 also demonstrates robustness in
tackling high-speed scenarios.
Trajectory deviations. In Table IX and Table X, we present
the performance analysis under trajectory-level deviations. The
degradation caused by translation-only deviation is evident

<!-- page 11 -->
TABLE IX: Trajectory estimation error (ATE↓[m] ) under trajectory-level deviation.
Rotate [deg]
Clean
0
1
3
5
Translate [m]
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
Monocular SLAM Models
ORBSLAM3 [7]
0.0145 0.0172 0.136F 0.190F
0.0634
0.1463 0.348F 0.1999 0.170F 0.0548 0.0532 0.0613 0.0732 0.0227 0.0409
0.0803
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0039
0.0084
0.0077
0.0091
0.0083
0.0079
0.0082
0.0094
RGBD SLAM Models
ORBSLAM3 [7]
0.0823 0.1913 0.0851
0.0585
0.1629 0.0835
0.1483 0.0905 0.1581 0.0853
0.0723 0.0497
0.0616
iMAP [59]
0.1209 0.0334 0.1386
0.0442
0.2438
0.2135 0.3754 0.2801
Nice-SLAM [80] 0.0147 0.5812
CO-SLAM [67]
0.0090 0.0420 0.0848
0.3087
0.4579
0.5069 0.2998 0.5040
0.6443 0.6630 0.7532 0.5772 0.8457 0.7966 0.8277
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0046
0.0082
0.0082
0.0081
0.0080
0.0080
0.0078
0.0077
SplaTAM-S [30]
0.0045
0.0545 0.0980
0.2964
0.297F
0.2272 0.2313
1) As ORBSLAM3 [7] fails to predict subsequent frames when losing track, we follow [68, 7] to present ATE calculated with partial trajectory.
2) For neural SLAM models (iMAP, Nice-SLAM, CO-SLAM, GO-SLAM, and SplaTAM-S), we follow [59, 80, 67, 30, 77] to calculate ATE on the full trajectory.
3) We highlight the best performance, i.e., the lowest ATE, under each trajectory deviation setting of monocular and RGB SLAM models in bold, respectively.
4) Notation F represents settings that include failure sequences where no final trajectory is generated due to tracking loss. The number in front of F represents the
average ATE as failure sequences are set as a value of 1.0. Notation
indicates completely unacceptable trajectory estimation performance, i.e., ATE ≥1.0 [m].
TABLE X: Success rate (SR↑) of pose tracking under trajectory-level deviation for ORBSLAM3 [7].
Rotate [deg]
Clean
0
1
3
5
Translate [m]
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
Monocular
0.854
0.489
0.247
0.128
0.662
0.340
0.221
0.120
0.373
0.096
0.087
0.059
0.413
0.155
0.214
0.144
±0.149 ±0.107 ±0.129 ±0.091 ±0.329 ±0.189 ±0.156 ±0.069 ±0.329 ±0.154 ±0.081 ±0.056 ±0.418 ±0.160 ±0.112 ±0.039
RGBD
0.960
0.462
0.321
0.152
0.596
0.345
0.228
0.114
0.325
0.259
0.146
0.118
0.422
0.158
0.180
0.129
±0.046 ±0.213 ±0.085 ±0.100 ±0.491 ±0.218 ±0.151 ±0.115 ±0.270 ±0.226 ±0.121 ±0.087 ±0.428 ±0.156 ±0.148 ±0.092
Results are presented with mean±standard deviation. We highlight the best performance, i.e., the highest SR, under each trajectory deviation setting in bold.
TABLE XI: Trajectory estimation error (ATE↓[m]) under
sensor misalignment for RGBD SLAM methods.
Method
Clean
Static Mode
Dynamic Mode
∆= 0 ∆= 5 ∆= 10 ∆= 20 ∆= 5 ∆= 10 ∆= 20
ORBSLAM3 [7] 0.0823 0.0689 0.0661
0.0647
0.0703 0.0773
0.0826
iMAP [59]
0.1209 0.4672 0.5344
0.6345
0.5104 0.6803
0.6745
Nice-SLAM [80] 0.0147 0.3820 0.4062
0.5216
0.5433 0.5548
0.7020
CO-SLAM [67]
0.0090 0.0520 0.1005
0.1939
0.0740 0.1164
0.2108
GO-SLAM [77]
0.0046 0.0148
0.0292
0.0646
0.0151
0.0297
0.0650
SplaTAM-S [30]
0.0045 0.0554 0.0629
0.0880
0.0402 0.0645
0.0850
1) ∆denotes the misaligned frame interval between RGB and depth streams.
2) We highlight the best performance, i.e., the lowest ATE, under each
severity level of multi-sensor misalignment in bold.
TABLE XII: Success rate (SR↑) of pose tracking under sensor
misalignment for RGBD-based ORBSLAM3 [7].
Perturb
Clean
Misaligned Frame Interval (∆)
Mode
∆= 0
∆= 5
∆= 10
∆= 20
Static
0.960 ± 0.046 0.960 ± 0.036 0.958 ± 0.029 0.954 ± 0.030
Dynamic
0.955 ± 0.039 0.942 ± 0.050 0.948 ± 0.041
1) Results are presented with mean±standard deviation.
2) We highlight the best performance, i.e., the highest SR, under each
severity level of multi-sensor misalignment in bold.
for most advanced models, e.g., a random deviation of 2.5
cm in the translation vector leads to a significant increase
in trajectory estimation error. Similarly, for rotation-only de-
viation, a mere 3-degree random deviation in camera pose
leads to an unacceptable ATE score and nearly complete
loss of tracking capability for most SLAM models evaluated.
Furthermore, simultaneous introduction of translation and ro-
tation deviations amplifies trajectory estimation error, resulting
in the failure of nearly all models. Notably, SplaTAM-S,
which generally exhibits robustness under sensor corruptions,
encounters failures in 9 out of 15 settings under trajectory-level
deviations. Alternately, we observe that ORBSLAM3 and GO-
SLAM demonstrate better robustness to trajectory deviation,
which can be attributed to the incorporation of loop closure
and global bundle adjustment techniques not utilized by other
benchmarking methods. Overall, the accuracy of trajectory
estimation in most advanced SLAM models is significantly
influenced by locomotion deviations, particularly under high
severity of perturbations.
Multi-sensor misalignment perturbation. Table XI and Ta-
ble XII present the comparison of trajectory estimation errors
and success ratio of tracked trajectory under different severity
levels of multi-sensor misalignment, characterized by the
frame interval between multiple sensor streams. The perfor-
mance of iMAP and Nice-SLAM significantly deteriorates as
the misalignment intervals increase. In contrast, CO-SLAM,
GO-SLAM, and SplaTAM-S demonstrate a certain degree
of tolerance towards misalignment. Generally, increasing dis-
synchronization frames leads to larger performance drop.
E. Discussion
Can one model rule out all perturbed settings? In our
robustness analysis of existing SLAM models, some methods
exhibit specialization in achieving robustness under specific
perturbed settings. However, a general model that demon-

<!-- page 12 -->
Original 
Speed (1×) 
Faster 
Motion (2×)
Ground-truth
(for reference) 
PSNR: 29.10 
L1: ~0.00 
PSNR: 28.33 
L1: 0.01 
PSNR: 21.54 
L1: 0.02 
Reconstruction
Failure
Reconstruction
Failure
Faster 
Motion (4×)
RGB Image
Depth Map
Fig. 7: Effect of faster motion on the reconstruction quality
of RGB images (Top) and depth maps (Bottom), which are
measured via PSNR and Depth L1 loss, for SplaTAM-S [30].
Fig. 8: Correlation between ATE (logarithm form) and re-
construction quality of on the reconstruction quality of RGB
images (Left) and depth maps (Right) under faster motion
for SplaTAM-S [30]. Pearson correlation coefficient [13] is
reported in the bottom-right corner of each sub-figure.
strates robustness against both sensor and trajectory perturba-
tions remains elusive. Different SLAM methods demonstrate
varying performance across different settings, emphasizing
the need for tailored approaches for specific scenarios. This
finding underscores the importance of selecting the most
suitable SLAM method based on the specific requirements and
characteristics of the application at hand.
Is there a correlation between a model’s performance in
clean and perturbed settings? We observe a lack of correlation
in our analysis, as certain methods that exhibit strong perfor-
mance under standard clean conditions demonstrate notably
inferior performance when subject to specific perturbations.
The lack of correlation highlights the importance of evaluating
SLAM methods across more diverse perturbed environments
to obtain a thorough and robust assessment.
Can a current SLAM model detect degraded observations?
We conduct a case study to explore the ability of an advanced
RGBD SLAM model SplaTAM-S, to perceive perturbation
severity. In Fig.7, we assess the response of SplaTAM-S to
faster motion perturbations. It can be observed that more se-
vere perturbations lead to poorer reconstruction quality for the
model. Additionally, in Fig.8, we observe a strong correlation
between the accuracy of the final trajectory estimation and
the quality of RGBD reconstruction. These findings suggest
that the model can potentially identify perturbations during
inference, as lower reconstruction loss corresponds to better
trajectory accuracy; that is, the reconstruction quality can
potentially serve as a useful indicator to predict the final
trajectory estimation error.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
A. Conclusion
In this work, we have made several contributions to advance
the field of SLAM evaluation under perturbation. We presented
a comprehensive taxonomy of perturbations in SLAM and
introduced a versatile data synthesis pipeline. This pipeline
can be utilized to generate customizable perturbed datasets,
laying the ground work for rigorous robustness benchmarking.
Leveraging this innovative pipeline, we created the Robust-
SLAM benchmark – a large-scale initiative designed to assess
the resilience of state-of-the-art multi-modal SLAM models
against a wide range of perturbations.
Our extensive evaluation has revealed vulnerabilities in
current SLAM systems when exposed to various perturba-
tions. These findings not only highlight the limitations of
existing models and their potential failures in real-world,
unstructured environments, but also offer valuable insights
for future research aimed at overcoming these challenges.
Through our contributions, we aim to pave the way for the
development and evaluation of the next generation of robust
SLAM systems, enhancing their performance and reliability
in complex environments.
B. Future Work
Future research efforts could aim to unravel the complex in-
terplay between multiple perturbations and evaluate the SLAM
model’s robustness under mixed perturbations. In addition, a
deep dive into regional sensor corruptions [41] and adversar-
ial perturbations [40] would be valuable as well. Moreover,
leveraging generative models [48] to enhance the quality of
perturbation synthesis could significantly advance our capa-
bility to create realistic and challenging testing environments.
Furthermore, further exploration on robust SLAM designs,
such as sensor correction [76] in the front-end of SLAM
systems, would provide valuable insights. Such approaches are
crucial for mitigating the impact of sensor noise and enhancing
the accuracy of the SLAM system. Additionally, exploring the
robustness of active SLAM [46] and multi-agent SLAM [62]
represents an exciting frontier. The active coordination and
sensor fusion among multiple robots have the potential to
effectively handle noise and elevate SLAM performance.

<!-- page 13 -->
Brightness
Contrast
Defocus
Blur
Gaussian
Noise
Gaussian
Blur
Glass
Blur
Fog
Effect
Frost
Effect
Spatter
Pixelate
Motion
Blur
Shot
Noise
Impulse
Noise
Speckle
Noise
Snow
Effect
Jpeg
Compression
Low
Middle
High
Low
Middle
High
Fig. A: Illustration of sensor-level perturbations for the RGB imaging under different severity levels. We consider 16
common image corruption types [24] from 4 main categories of perturbations for SLAM robustness evaluation: (1) noise-
based distortions: Gaussian noise, shot noise, impulse noise, and speckle noise; (2) blur-based effects: defocus blur, glass
blur, motion blur, and Gaussian blur; (3) environmental interferences: snow effect, frost effect, fog effect, and spatter effect.
(4) post-processing manipulations: brightness, contrast, pixelate, and JPEG compression. Each perturbation type is further
split into 3 severity levels (low, middle, and high) for the instantiated SLAM robustness benchmark, i.e., Robust-SLAM.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
The authors would like to thank lab-mates at Hybrid Dy-
namic Robotics Lab of UMich Robotics for help and support.
The authors appreciate the GPU resources provided by Prof.
Ram Vasudevan from UMich Robotics. The authors are grate-
ful to Dr. Lu Li from CMU Biorobotics Lab, Prof. Siheng
Chen from SJTU, Dr. Wenshan Wang from CMU AirLab, and
Dr. Youmin Zhang from University of Bologna for valuable
discussions. The authors express their gratitude to Prof. Sara
Nezami Nav, Prof. Pamela Bogart, Mrs. Lucy Kates, Mr. Todd
Maslyk from UMich ELI; Prof. Julie Babcock, Prof. Raymond
McDaniel, and Prof. Dave Karczynski from UMich Sweetland
Center for proofreading.
APPENDIX A
APPENDIX OVERVIEW
Appendix overview. The appendix is organized as follows:
• Sec. B provides additional details about the perturbation
taxonomy for the evaluation of SLAM under perturbation.
• Sec. C presents more information about the setup and
statistics of the instantiated Robust-SLAM benchmark.
• Sec. D offers supplementary results and discussions
based on the experiments conducted on the Robust-SLAM
benchmark.
• Sec. E presents the case study of the robustness analysis
on the multi-view SLAM system, specifically under the
stereo and stereo-inertia settings. This case study high-
lights the importance of considering the robustness of
both the hardware and software aspects of the SLAM
system in a holistic manner.
• Sec. F provides preliminary robustness analyses on the
multi-agent SLAM system, aiming to provide insights
into extending the robustness evaluation to more hetero-
geneous and diverse SLAM systems.
• Sec. G presents the qualitative results of SLAM models
under perturbations, including the trajectory estimation
and 3D reconstruction prediction results of both success-
ful cases and failure cases.
• Sec. H provides a brief introduction to additional future
directions that can advance the frontier of robustness
evaluation for SLAM systems under perturbation.
Video demo. We provide a video demo in the supplementary
material that exhibits the visualization of the synthesized noisy
data for SLAM robustness evaluation, which includes both
sensor and trajectory perturbations. The video also showcases
qualitative per-frame prediction results of advanced SLAM
models when subjected to perturbations, illustrating both suc-
cessful cases and failure cases.

<!-- page 14 -->
Original
Rotate 
(3°)
Rotate 
(5°)
Translate 
(0.0125m)
Translate 
(0.025m)
Translate 
(0.05m)
Rotate 
(1°)
Faster 
Motion (2×)
t
Not Observed
Vertical lines
(for reference)
t+1
t+2
t
t+1
t+2
Fig. B: Rendered RGB image streams under trajectory-level perturbations, including translation deviations (Translate),
rotation deviations (Rotate), and the faster motion effect.
APPENDIX B
MORE DETAILS ABOUT PERTURBATION TAXONOMY
A. Sensor-level Perturbation on RGB Imaging
Illustration of varied severity levels of sensor corruptions
on RGB Imaging. Our work considers a comprehensive
taxonomy of image-level corruptions specifically designed to
evaluate the robustness of SLAM algorithms. The taxonomy
encompasses 16 common image corruption types, categorized
into four distinct groups: noise-based distortions, blur-based
effects, environmental interferences, and post-processing ma-
nipulations. To facilitate a rigorous evaluation, we follow the
robustness evaluation setup for vision tasks [24] to further
split each perturbation type into three severity levels in our
instantiated Robust-SLAM benchmark. In Fig. A, we show the
perturbed RGB images under different severity levels of image
corruptions. Although certain types of image corruption (e.g.,
motion blur) only lead to slight changes in appearance, they
might lead to significant performance degradation for several
advanced multi-modal SLAM models, as demonstrated in the
benchmarking results section of the main paper.
B. Trajectory-level Perturbation
Illustration of the rendered sensor streams under trajec-
tory perturbations. In Fig. B, we present the rendered image
streams under varying severity levels of trajectory-level pertur-
bations, encompassing translational deviations, rotational de-
viations, and faster motion effects. Although the rotational and
translational deviations we examined result in minor changes
in observations between adjacent frames, these perturbations
lead to significant performance degradation across the majority
of benchmarking SLAM models. As depicted in Fig. C, even
slight trajectory-level deviations can have a substantial impact
on trajectory estimation performance.
C. Sensor-level Perturbation on Depth Imaging
Motivation for depth perturbation. As depicted in Fig. D,
there exists a noticeable disparity between the current simu-
lated clean depth distribution obtained from the Replica [57]
SLAM benchmark and the real noisy depth data derived from
the TUM-RGBD [53] SLAM benchmark. In Replica, the
minimum depth measures approximately 0.18 m, whereas the
TUM-RGBD data exhibits a minimum depth value of 0.4 m,
reflecting the limitations of real-world depth sensors. Notably,
we observe a significant discrepancy in the depth missing
rates, with TUM-RGBD demonstrating an approximate 25%
missing rate compared to nearly zero (0.39%) in Replica.
These observations underscore the necessity of exploring
perturbation strategies for depth imaging to bridge the gap
between simulated depth and real-world depth.
APPENDIX C
MORE DETAILS OF Robust-SLAM BENCHMARK
A. Robust-SLAM Benchmark Statistics
Benchmark sequence number distribution. Using our es-
tablished taxonomy of perturbations for SLAM and the noisy
data synthesis pipeline, we have created a large-scale SLAM
robustness benchmark called Robust-SLAM to evaluate the
robustness of monocular and multi-modal (RGBD) SLAM
methods by incorporating various perturbations that mimic
real-world sensor and action anomalies. We provide details
about the specific distribution of sequence numbers for each
perturbation type as follows:
1) 8 original clean sequences: These sequences replicate
the quality and the sequence number of the original
Replica SLAM dataset [59].
2) 768 sequences with image-level perturbations: We
apply 16 different types of image-level perturbations at 3
severity levels, both under static and dynamic conditions.

<!-- page 15 -->
Rotation
Deviation 
(5°)
Translation
 Deviation
(0.05m)
ATE: 1.0671
ATE: 0.3902
ATE: 0.2388
Sensor Misalignment
(5 frames) 
Faster Motion
Effect (2×)
Original
(Clean) 
Rotation 
(3°)
Translation
Deviation 
(0.025m)
ATE: 0.1247
ATE : 0.7970
Rotation
Deviation 
(1°)
ATE: 0.6656
ATE: 0.8697
Translation
Deviation 
(0.0125m)
ATE: 0.2077
ATE: 0.2704
Estimated Trajectory
Ground-truth Trajectory
Rotation
Deviation 
(3°)
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
-4.5 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0
-1.5 -1.0 -0.5
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
1.00
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
1.00
-4.0
-3.0
-2.0
-1.0
0.0
-0.5
y [m]
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
y [m]
1.00
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
-2.00
y [m]
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
x [m]
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
x [m]
-4.0
-3.0
-2.0
-1.0
0.0
x [m]
-3.5 -3.0 -2.5
-2.0 -1.5
-1.0 -0.5
0.0
Fig. C: Illustration of trajectory deviations under different severity levels, the faster motion effect, and the multi-sensor
misalignment effect. We also show qualitative results of an advanced real-time SLAM model, i.e., CO-SLAM [67]. The impact
of translation deviation, rotation deviation, faster motion, and sensor misalignment perturbations is assessed. For clarity, we
visualize the projected trajectory on the horizontal x-y plane derived from the 3D trajectory, which shows that slight trajectory
deviations can have a significant impact on the trajectory estimation performance, measured by ATE.
3) 32 sequences with depth-level perturbations: This cat-
egory consists of 4 types of perturbations. For the depth
noise, we adopt the hyperparameters of the Gaussian
noise distribution as specified in previous literature [24].
Moreover, we set the depth missing rate to 10% and es-
tablish the depth clipping range based on the real-world
depth distribution of the TUM-RGBD dataset [58], with
a minimum value of 0.42 meters and a maximum value
of 10 meters.
4) 24 sequences with increased motion levels: These se-
quences involve faster speed than the original sequences,
with variations of two, four, and eight times the original
speed.
5) 120 sequences with trajectory-level deviations: This
category includes pure rotation deviation, pure trans-
lation deviation, and combined transformation matrix
deviation. We define three severity levels for both rota-
tion and translation deviations, and sample the deviation
from a Gaussian distribution. Specifically, for rotation
deviation, we introduce random deviations in rotation
around the x, y, and z axes, with mean values of
zero and standard deviations of 1, 3, and 5 degrees at
each pose frame. For translation deviation, we introduce
random deviations in the x, y, and z axes, with mean
values of zero and standard deviations of 0.0125, 0.025,
and 0.05 meters at each pose frame. In Fig. E, we
show the motion statistics of the perturbed trajectory
sequences under varying combinations of translation
and rotation deviations. This category of trajectory-
deviated sequences encompasses a broad spectrum of

<!-- page 16 -->
Depth Min Depth Max Depth Mean Depth Std
0
2
4
6
8
10
Depth [m]
0.42
10.50
1.22
0.41
0.18
6.76
2.42
0.56
(a) Depth Distribution
TUM-RGBD
Replica
Mean
Std
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Missing Rate [%]
24.719
9.571
0.394
1.440
(b) Depth Missing Rate
TUM-RGBD
Replica
Fig. D: Discrepancy in depth characteristics between
current simulated and real-world SLAM datasets. Here,
we compare the depth (a) distribution and (b) missing rate
between real-world collected depth from the TUM-RGBD [58]
dataset and simulated depth from the Replica [57] dataset.
motion speeds and accelerations, enabling a progressive
evaluation of the robustness of SLAM models against
increasingly challenging motion types. These insights
are especially valuable for evaluating the implementation
of SLAM systems in high-speed scenarios or on agile
robot platforms exposed to significant vibrations.
6) 48 sequences with multi-sensor misalignment: We
consider both static and dynamic perturbation models
for multi-sensor misalignment. In the static mode, a con-
stant time delay is synthesized between the two sensor
streams, while in the dynamic perturbation model, there
is a varying time delay between the streams. Specifically,
the multi-sensor misalignment perturbation sequences
consist of 24 sequences with a fixed cross-sensor frame
delay interval (k) of 5, 10, and 20 frames, as well as 24
sequences with dynamic perturbation where k deviates
by 1 frame from the fixed intervals of 5, 10, and 20
frames.
Overall, this benchmark dataset enables a comprehensive
evaluation of existing SLAM algorithms under simulated per-
turbations, providing a thorough assessment of the robustness
of multi-modal SLAM systems in a wide range of challenges.
B.
SLAM Models for Benchmarking
Below, we offer additional descriptions of SLAM models
that have been benchmarked on our Robust-SLAM benchmark.
1) ORB-SLAM3 [7] is an extension of ORB-SLAM2 [43]
that incorporates a multi-map system and visual-inertial odom-
etry, enhancing robustness and performance.
2) iMAP [59] is a neural RGBD SLAM system that utilizes
the MLP representation to achieve joint tracking and mapping.
3) Nice-SLAM [80] is a neural RGBD SLAM model that
employs a multi-level feature grid for scene representation,
reducing computational overhead and improving scalability.
4) CO-SLAM [67] is an advanced neural RGBD SLAM
system with a hybrid representation, enabling robust camera
tracking and high-fidelity surface reconstruction in real time.
TABLE A: Definitions of 3D metrics for evaluation of mesh
reconstruction quality of the reconstructed 3D mesh P when
given the ground-truth 3D mesh Q (in the scale of meter [m]).
We follows the 3D reconstruction metrics defined in the CO-
SLAM [67] paper.
3D Reconstruction Metric
Definition
Accuracy (ACC)
1
|P |
P
p∈P
 minq∈Q ||p −q||2
Completion (Comp.)
1
|Q|
P
q∈Q
 minp∈P ||p −q||2
Completion Ratio (Comp. R.)
1
|Q|
P
q∈Q
 minp∈P ||p −q||2 ≤0.05

5) GO-SLAM [77] is a neural visual SLAM framework
for real-time optimization of poses and 3D reconstruction. It
supports both monocular and RGBD input settings.
6) SplaTAM [30] is a neural RGBD SLAM model that
follows Gaussian Splatting [31] to construct an adaptive map
representation based on Gaussian kernels. Due to the time
and computational constraints, we evaluate the relatively more
efficient SplaTAM-S model variant in our benchmark.
APPENDIX D
MORE RESULTS AND DISCUSSIONS
A. More Evaluation Metrics
Localization: cumulative success rate (CSR). Cumulative
success rate metric is used to evaluate the adherence to
predefined trajectory estimation accuracy for SLAM systems,
defined as:
CSR(ξ) = #(ATE ≤ξ)
#(Total)
× 100
(25)
Here, CSR(ξ) represents the cumulative success rate [%] for
a specific threshold ξ of ATE metric; #(ATE ≤ξ) counts
the trajectories with an ATE within the defined threshold, and
#(Total) represents the total number of evaluated settings.
Mapping:
metrics
for
3D
Reconstruction. We follow
the mapping quality evaluation protocol in [67] to assess
3D reconstruction using Accuracy (ACC) [cm], Completion
(Comp.) [cm], and Completion Ratio (Comp. R.) [%] with
a 5 cm threshold. Table A details the definition for each of
these metrics. Note that only certain dense SLAM models
can produce 3D reconstruction results for further evaluation
of mapping quality.
B. More Benchmarking Analyses
Is there a correlation in the performance after perturba-
tion among different image perturbation types? In Fig. F,
a strong correlation is observed in the combined perturbed
performance vector of all evaluated RGBD SLAM models
for the majority of perturbation types. This finding suggests
that the models’ performance remains consistent across certain
perturbation scenarios. Additionally, the correlation suggests
the presence of underlying similarities in the effects of some
sub-categories of image perturbation types, e.g., noise effects.

<!-- page 17 -->
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Translation speed (m/s)
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Translation acceleration (m/s²)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
0
2
4
6
8
Rotation speed (°/s)
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.82
0.81
0.81
0.82
2.37
2.38
2.39
2.36
3.93
3.93
3.93
3.94
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
100
50
0
50
100
Rotation acceleration (°/s²)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.01
0.00
Fig. E: Motion statistics of trajectory distribution under varying combinations of translation and rotation deviations.
Assuming a frame rate of 20 frames per second for the SLAM system, i.e., a time interval of 0.05 seconds between neighboring
pose frames, we present the motion distribution of perturbed trajectories in our Robust-SLAM benchmark. The figures show the
distribution of translation speed (Top Left), translation acceleration (Top Right), rotation speed (Bottom Left), and rotation
acceleration (Bottom Right). We report the mean value of each setting.
TABLE B: Effects of image perturbation on 3d reconstruc-
tion (mapping) quality for CO-SLAM [67] model.
Metrics
Clean
Low
Middle
High
Perturb.
Mean Severity Severity Severity
Mean
ACC↓[cm]
2.08
2.11
2.12
2.39
2.21
Comp.↓[cm]
2.17
2.19
2.20
2.89
2.43
Comp. R.↑[%]
93.13
93.07
93.04
92.34
92.82
1) The setting with the best performance for each metric is in bold.
2) We compare the performance under no perturbation (clean) and
static image perturbations with different severity levels.
Is there a correlation in the performance under RGB im-
age perturbation among different methods? In Fig. G, a weak
correlation is observed in the combined perturbed performance
vector, which encompasses sixteen image perturbation types
across six SLAM models with the RGBD input setting. This
suggests a large divergence in the distribution of perturbed
performance among the different SLAM models.
How do image perturbations influence the mapping qual-
ity? In Fig. B, we evaluate the impact of image perturba-
tions on the mapping quality of the CO-SLAM [67] model,
which shows a strong robustness to most of the image-level
corruptions. The results reveal a direct correlation between
perturbation severity and both 3D reconstruction error and
completion error. Specifically, the clean setting achieves the
highest accuracy (2.08 cm) and the lowest completeness score
(2.17 cm), while the high perturbation severity setting exhibits
the highest errors in ACC (2.39 cm) and completion (2.89 cm).
Overall, our analysis shows that increasing severity levels of
perturbation lead to larger errors in the reconstructed 3D map.
C. More Discussions
Can a classical SLAM model be aware of degraded
observations? In the main paper, we showcase that, for the
neural SLAM model SplaTAM-S [30], there is an obvious
correlation between the RGBD reconstruction quality and the
final trajectory estimation accuracy under the faster motion

<!-- page 18 -->
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
1.00
0.81
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.71
0.54
0.71
0.83
0.60
0.94
0.77
0.77
0.81
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.99
0.75
0.55
0.75
0.90
0.81
0.90
0.99
0.99
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.71
0.75
0.83
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.83
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.60
0.60
0.83
0.83
0.54
0.55
0.66
0.66
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.66
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.83
0.37
0.37
0.66
0.66
0.71
0.75
0.83
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.83
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.60
0.60
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.60
0.81
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.60
0.37
0.60
0.77
1.00
0.66
0.83
0.83
0.94
0.90
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.60
0.37
0.60
0.77
0.66
1.00
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
1.00
0.60
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.64
0.60
0.54
0.83
0.66
0.66
0.71
0.60
0.60
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.54
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.93
0.77
0.83
0.49
0.89
0.94
0.89
0.94
0.94
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.64
0.99
0.93
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
0.90
0.84
0.64
0.99
0.84
0.90
0.99
0.99
0.60
0.83
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.90
1.00
0.94
0.83
0.94
0.60
0.66
0.83
0.83
0.54
0.77
0.83
0.77
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.84
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.89
0.66
0.60
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.54
0.49
0.54
0.71
0.71
0.71
0.64
0.83
0.77
1.00
0.71
0.43
0.49
0.54
0.54
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.66
0.89
0.94
0.89
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.84
0.60
0.66
0.43
0.77
1.00
0.94
0.89
0.89
0.71
0.94
0.89
0.94
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.90
0.66
0.60
0.49
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Fig. F: Correlation of perturbed performance (ATE) of multi-modal (RGBD) SLAM models across different image
perturbation types under static (Left) and dynamic (Right) perturbation mode. The pair-wise correlation strength is quantified
via Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient [56].
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
1.00
0.09 -0.26 -0.10 0.37 -0.12
0.09
1.00 -0.12 -0.16 -0.32 -0.12
-0.26 -0.12 1.00
0.32
0.29 -0.12
-0.10 -0.16 0.32
1.00
0.59
0.68
0.37 -0.32 0.29
0.59
1.00
0.40
-0.12 -0.12 -0.12 0.68
0.40
1.00
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
1.00 -0.27 -0.49 -0.35 0.07 -0.10
-0.27 1.00 -0.23 0.74
0.34
0.29
-0.49 -0.23 1.00
0.10
0.01
0.11
-0.35 0.74
0.10
1.00
0.47
0.42
0.07
0.34
0.01
0.47
1.00
0.24
-0.10 0.29
0.11
0.42
0.24
1.00
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Fig. G: Correlation of perturbed performance (ATE) across different multi-modal (RGBD) SLAM models under static
(Left) and dynamic (Right) image perturbation. The pair-wise correlation strength is quantified via Spearman’s rank correlation
coefficient [56].
perturbation. Here, we explore the ability of a classical SLAM
model, i.e., ORB-SLAM3 [7], to ‘perceive’ perturbation sever-
ity. Specifically, we aim to explore the correlation between
the quality of ORB feature detection and the resulting overall
performance. In Fig. H, we present qualitative comparisons of
the ORB feature detection results of ORB-SLAM3 under the
influence of varying severity levels of Gaussian blur image-
level perturbations. It is evident that more severe perturbations
result in a lower number of detected ORB features. In addition,
Fig.I depicts the correlation between the number of (detected
or matched) ORB feature descriptors and the accuracy of
trajectory estimation. With increasing severity levels, a no-
ticeable reduction in the number of ORB features is observed,
accompanied by a subsequent rise in trajectory estimation
error, i.e., ATE. This trend indicates that the deterioration
of detected feature descriptors could serve as an informative
indicator for identifying degraded and anomalous observations.
Furthermore, it has the potential to provide a rough estimation
of the overall performance of ORB-SLAM3 in situations
where ground-truth annotation is unavailable.
Are current SLAM models specialized or generalist? Fig. J
depicts the cumulative success rate (CSR) curves of some

<!-- page 19 -->
Original Clean Image
ATE RMSE: 0.00278
# ORB Feature: 1005
Gaussian Blur (Low Severity) 
Gaussian Blur (Mid Severity) 
Gaussian Blur (High Severity) 
ATE RMSE: 0.00295 
# ORB Feature: 1004
ATE RMSE: 0.00630 
# ORB Feature: 965
ATE RMSE: 0.04496 
# ORB Feature: 445
Fig. H: Effect of Gaussian Blur image-level perturbation under different severity (Top) on the quality of detected ORB
features (Bottom), which are marked as green dots, for the classical SLAM model ORBSLAM3 [7]. We report the average
trajectory accuracy via ATE RMSE and the average number of ORB features detected in various perturbed settings.
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Average Detected ORB Feature Number
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Log (ATE RMSE)
Correlation: -0.48
Severity
Low
Middle
High
150
200
250
300
350
400
Average Tracked ORB Feature Number
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Log (ATE RMSE)
Correlation: -0.47
Severity
Low
Middle
High
Fig. I: Correlation between trajectory estimation accuracy and the average number of detected (Left) and tracked
(Right) ORB features for ORBSLAM3 [7] model (RGBD setting) under different severity level of Gaussian Blur image-level
perturbation. We report the Pearson correlation coefficient [13] at the bottom right corner. While the correlation coefficient
does not indicate a significant linear correlation, there is a noticeable trend of increased trajectory estimation when fewer ORB
features are detected or tracked.
advanced SLAM models, providing insights into their perfor-
mance across various categories of perturbations. For the qual-
itative comparison within each perturbation type, we present
separate cumulative success rate results of different SLAM
methods in Fig.L, Fig.M, Fig.N, Fig.O, Fig.P, and Fig.Q
(with the clean setting in Fig. K as a reference). The results
highlight the vulnerability of current models to ‘survive’ under
varied perturbation types. It reveals that different methods
exhibit specialization in achieving robustness under specific
settings. For instance, the SplaTAM-S [30] model excels under
image-level perturbations, while the GO-SLAM [77] model
demonstrates excellent robustness under trajectory-related per-
turbations. However, the development of a robust generalist
SLAM model that exhibits robustness against both sensor and
trajectory perturbations remains relatively under-explored.
APPENDIX E
ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS OF STEREO SLAM SYSTEM
UNDER PERTURBATION
Quantitative analysis. We conduct a robustness analysis
of a stereo SLAM system, which utilizes two cameras to
capture observations of the environment. In this study, we
focus on the inter-camera transformation matrix, a crucial
sensor parameter that describes the transformation between
the left and right cameras. Our objective is to investigate the
effects of introducing Gaussian noise as the perturbation to
the inter-camera transformation matrix of the stereo SLAM
system, which mimics the inaccuracy of the transformation

<!-- page 20 -->
TABLE C: Effects of perturbing the stereo camera baseline length on trajectory estimation performance of the
ORBSLAM3 model with stereo (Top) and stereo-inertia (Bottom) SLAM setting. We leverage three sequences, including
MH01, MH02, and MH03, on the EuRoC [5] dataset. We introduce random noise η along the axis of the stereo camera baseline.
The noise is sampled from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance σ2, represented as η ∼N(0, σ2) [m]. The
stereo camera has a predefined baseline length of 0.1 meters.
MH01 Sequence
MH02 Sequence
MH03 Sequence
Metrics
σ = 0.00
σ = 0.001
σ = 0.01
σ = 0.00
σ = 0.001
σ = 0.01
σ = 0.00
σ = 0.001
σ = 0.01
Stereo Setting
ATE-w/o Scale↓[m]
0.036
1.646
8.284
0.016
2.943
19.42
0.028
1.444
6.211
Scale
1.006
1.129
0.261
0.998
2.251
0.172
0.998
0.941
0.395
ATE-w/ Scale↓[m]
0.024
1.580
2.221
0.013
1.674
2.415
0.027
1.429
1.985
Stereo-inertia Setting
ATE-w/o Scale↓[m]
0.068
0.353
5.470
0.050
2.370
3.954
0.053
0.572
673.8
Scale
1.012
0.987
0.410
1.004
2.172
0.491
1.004
1.018
0.001
ATE-w/ Scale↓[m]
0.046
0.349
1.865
0.046
0.312
1.024
0.052
0.568
3.576
1)The best performance, indicated by the least ATE, for each sequence and input modality setting is highlighted in bold.
2) Under the clean setting (σ = 0.00), we observe that the Stereo setting has lower trajectory estimation than the stereo-inertia setting, which
is aligns with the results in Table V of the ORBSLAM3 [7] paper.
3) ATE-w/o Scale and ATE-w/ Scale refer to calculating the ATE metric without and with scaling the estimated trajectory using the ground truth
trajectory for evaluation, respectively; Scale refers to the relative scaling factor between the estimated and ground truth trajectories.
matrix. This inaccuracy can be caused by factors such as noisy
extrinsic matrix calibration, vibration due to a less rigid camera
holder, or errors in camera placement or assembly. Specifically,
we introduce random noise η along the stereo camera baseline
direction, sampled from a Gaussian distribution with zero
mean and variance σ2, denoted as η ∼N(0, σ2). In our
preliminary robustness study, we utilize the ORB-SLAM3
model with the stereo camera input setting and the stereo-
inertia setting. We apply random perturbations to the camera
baseline length for every frame in three sequences (MH01,
MH02, and NM03) from the EuRoC dataset [5]. The results
of our study are summarized in Table C, which includes three
severity levels of noises: σ = 0.00, σ = 0.001, and σ = 0.01.
Under the clean setting (σ = 0.00), when we introduced
perturbations to the baseline axis of the inter-camera transfor-
mation matrix, increasing the noise levels (e.g., σ = 0.001 and
σ = 0.01) resulted in a noticeable rise in trajectory estimation
error, which is quantified by ATE-w/o Scale and ATE-w/ Scale
metrics. This indicates a higher susceptibility to errors and
deviations from the ground truth trajectory during trajectory
estimation. These findings highlight the significance of taking
a holistic approach when considering the robustness of the
whole SLAM system. To ensure a comprehensive evaluation
of the SLAM model’s robustness, it is crucial to consider
not only the software (SLAM model) but also the hardware,
specifically the inaccuracies in predefined or estimated sensor
configurations. These inaccuracies can significantly affect the
overall system’s robustness.
Qualitative analysis. In Fig.R and Fig.S, we present quali-
tative analyses illustrating the impact of noises on the stereo
camera baseline. We evaluate the trajectory estimation perfor-
mance for both the stereo and stereo-inertia SLAM settings
using three sequences from the EuRoC dataset. The qualita-
tive comparisons reveal that the estimated trajectory becomes
noisier as the level of noise is increased. Notably, even a slight
random noise (Gaussian noise with zero mean and σ = 0.001
[m]) added to the camera baseline leads to a significant degra-
dation in trajectory estimation for all evaluated sequences. In
addition, our analysis reveals that when the variance of random
deviations of the stereo camera baseline reaches σ = 0.01
[m], the stereo SLAM system exhibits a complete failure
in both the stereo and stereo-inertia settings. These findings
emphasize the vulnerability of the stereo SLAM system to
inaccuracies in the sensor/camera extrinsics. The observed
degradation in trajectory estimation highlights the need for
precise calibration, robust camera holder design, and accurate
camera calibration to ensure reliable performance of the stereo
SLAM system.
APPENDIX F
ROBUSTNESS ANALYSIS OF MULTI-AGENT SLAM SYSTEM
UNDER PERTURBATION
We investigate the robustness of the multi-agent SLAM
framework COVINS-G [44] under Gaussian noise image-level
perturbation. We evaluate the performance of the model on the
EuRoC [5] dataset using the ORB-SLAM3 [7] model with
monocular-inertia input as the front-end module. The exper-
imental setup involves introducing varying severity levels of
perturbation, measured by the parameter σ, on all the agents of
a multi-agent system. Two metrics, Average Trajectory Error
(ATE) and Sum of Squared Errors (SSE), are used to assess
the multi-agent SLAM system’s performance. These metrics
provide a comprehensive evaluation of trajectory estimation
accuracy and the accumulation of errors, respectively. As is
shown in Table D, the multi-agent SLAM system demonstrates
consistent performance in the clean setting (σ = 0.00) and
low perturbation severity (σ = 0.02), indicating the sys-
tem’s ability to tolerate low random noise. However, as the

<!-- page 21 -->
TABLE D: Effects of Gaussian noise perturbation on tra-
jectory estimation performance for the multi-agent SLAM
framework COVINS-G [44] with the ORBSLAM3 [7] model
as the front-end are presented. The noise is sampled from
a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance σ2,
represented as η ∼N(0, σ2). The experiments were conducted
using a mono-inertia multi-modal input setting for each agent.
The results are reported based on running five agents in
sequential order on the MH scene of the EuRoC [5] dataset.
Metrics
σ2 = 0.00
σ2 = 0.02
σ2 = 0.04
ATE↓[cm]
0.071
0.071
0.088
SSE↓[cm]
11.545
12.517
20.354
1) The best performance for each metric is in bold.
2) SSE indicates sum of squared errors metric.
Please refer to COVINS-G [44] paper for more details.
perturbation severity increases to σ = 0.04, the system’s
performance degrades noticeably. The ATE experiences a
significant increase, suggesting the vulnerability of the model
to higher levels of perturbation. Similarly, the SSE metric rises
to 20.354 cm, reflecting the accumulation of errors caused by
the higher noise level.
APPENDIX G
QUALITATIVE RESULTS OF SLAM MODEL PERFORMANCE
UNDER PERTURBATIONS
This section presents qualitative results of trajectory esti-
mation and 3D reconstruction in SLAM models, highlighting
both successful and failure cases under specific perturbations.
ORB-SLAM3. Fig. T demonstrates the resilience of the
ORB-SLAM3 [7] model to certain image corruptions, e.g.,
brightness changing and defocus blur. However, we observed
that noise-related perturbations can cause the failure of ORB
feature detection of the ORB-SLAM3 model, resulting in
complete loss of tracking, as depicted in Fig. U.
Nice-SLAM. Fig. V showcases the 3D reconstruction and
trajectory estimation results of the Nice-SLAM [80] model
under varying levels of shot noise perturbation on the RGB
image. Nice-SLAM consistently produces high-quality geom-
etry reconstructions even when subjected to high severity
levels of shot noise, which we attribute to the nearly error-
free, unperturbed depth map aiding geometry reconstruction.
However, we observe that the model struggles to accurately
predict and reconstruct appearance details. Consequently, as
the noise in the RGB images intensifies, color reconstruc-
tion quality diminishes. Furthermore, Fig. W highlights the
complete failure of the Nice-SLAM model in reconstructing
3D geometry and maintaining tracking when exposed to rapid
motion.
SplaTAM-S. Fig. X presents the qualitative results of the
SplaTAM-S [30] model under different severity levels of mo-
tion blur image-level perturbations. The trajectory estimation
reveals that, in the absence of perturbation or with low levels of
motion blur, the model produces smooth trajectories. However,
as perturbation severity increases to a moderate or high level,
the predicted trajectory exhibits more deviations. Notably, the
3D reconstruction consistently maintains high quality despite
the increasing blurring caused by observation degradation.
In addition, Fig.Y and Fig.Z depict failure instances of the
SplaTAM-S [30] model. These failures occur when subjected
to varying levels of contrast decrease image-level perturbation
under both static and dynamic perturbation modes. Higher
severity levels of perturbation result in complete tracking loss
and reconstruction failure.
To provide a better viewing experience, we kindly refer you
to the attached video demo.
APPENDIX H
MORE FUTURE DIRECTIONS FOR EXPLORATION
Robustness evaluation in unbounded 3D scene. Our work
does not encompass the robustness of SLAM systems in
unbounded scenes, such as outdoor environments [19, 78]. In-
vestigating the robustness of SLAM systems in such scenarios
holds significant potential for future research. It can contribute
to a better understanding of the practical applicability and
generalizability of SLAM systems in complex scenes.
Computationally-efficient robustness evaluation. Our find-
ings have identified discernible indicators within certain
SLAM models that can reflect degraded observations, i.e., the
reconstruction quality of RGB images and depth maps for
the SplaTAM-S [30] model. Future research could explore
leveraging and designing robustness indicators to evaluate
the robustness of SLAM systems more efficiently. By in-
corporating such indicators, we have the potential to enable
unsupervised performance evaluation of SLAM systems, es-
pecially in scenarios where obtaining ground-truth annotations
is challenging or costly.
Real-world robustness evaluation. While our work primarily
focuses on synthesis-based robustness analysis, we recognize
the value of real-world verification and validation for SLAM
systems. Conducting extensive field tests in more challenging
environments [20], where SLAM systems are subjected to ag-
ile locomotion types [28], would provide empirical validation
of simulation results and uncover additional challenges. This
real-world evaluation would bridge the gap between simulated
environments and actual deployment conditions, ensuring the
practical reliability and robustness of SLAM systems.
REFERENCES
[1] Pasquale Antonante, Sushant Veer, Karen Leung, Xin-
shuo Weng, Luca Carlone, and Marco Pavone.
Task-
aware risk estimation of perception failures for au-
tonomous vehicles.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.01870,
2023.
[2] Vittorio Bianco, Pasquale Memmolo, Marco Leo, Silvio
Montresor, Cosimo Distante, Melania Paturzo, Pascal
Picart, Bahram Javidi, and Pietro Ferraro.
Strategies
for reducing speckle noise in digital holography. Light:
Science and Applications, 7(1):48, 2018.

<!-- page 22 -->
[3] Jos´e-Luis
Blanco-Claraco,
Francisco-Angel
Moreno-
Duenas, and Javier Gonz´alez-Jim´enez. The m´alaga urban
dataset: High-rate stereo and lidar in a realistic urban
scenario. Int. J. Robot. Research, 33(2):207–214, 2014.
[4] Mihai Bujanca, Xuesong Shi, Matthew Spear, Pengpeng
Zhao, Barry Lennox, and Mikel Luj´an. Robust slam sys-
tems: Are we there yet? In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pages 5320–5327. IEEE, 2021.
[5] Michael Burri, Janosch Nikolic, Pascal Gohl, Thomas
Schneider, Joern Rehder, Sammy Omari, Markus W
Achtelik, and Roland Siegwart. The EuRoC micro aerial
vehicle datasets. The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 2016.
[6] Cesar Cadena, Luca Carlone, Henry Carrillo, Yasir Latif,
Davide Scaramuzza, Jos´e Neira, Ian Reid, and John J.
Leonard.
Past, present, and future of simultaneous
localization and mapping: Toward the robust-perception
age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 32(6):1309–1332,
2016.
[7] Carlos
Campos,
Richard
Elvira,
Juan
J.
G´omez
Rodr´ıguez, Jos´e M. M. Montiel, and Juan D. Tard´os.
Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual,
visual–inertial, and multimap slam. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 37(6):1874–1890, 2021.
[8] Nicholas
Carlevaris-Bianco,
Arash
K
Ushani,
and
Ryan M Eustice. University of michigan north campus
long-term vision and lidar dataset.
The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 35(9):1023–1035, 2016.
[9] Alexandra Carlson, Katherine A. Skinner, Ram Vasude-
van, and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Modeling camera
effects to improve visual learning from synthetic data. In
Proceedings of the European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV) Workshops, September 2018.
[10] Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Judy Hoffman, Roozbeh Mot-
taghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi.
Robustnav: Towards
benchmarking robustness in embodied navigation.
In
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, pages 15691–15700, 2021.
[11] Changhao Chen, Bing Wang, Chris Xiaoxuan Lu, Niki
Trigoni, and Andrew Markham. Deep learning for visual
localization and mapping: A survey. IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, pages 1–21,
2023.
[12] Yukyung Choi, Namil Kim, Soonmin Hwang, Kibaek
Park, Jae Shin Yoon, Kyounghwan An, and In So Kweon.
Kaist multi-spectral day/night data set for autonomous
and assisted driving. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 19(3):934–948, 2018.
[13] Israel Cohen, Yiteng Huang, Jingdong Chen, Jacob Ben-
esty, Jacob Benesty, Jingdong Chen, Yiteng Huang, and
Israel Cohen.
Pearson correlation coefficient.
Noise
reduction in speech processing, pages 1–4, 2009.
[14] Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Hal-
ber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. Scannet:
Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5828–5839, 2017.
[15] Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca
Weihs, Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han, Eric
Kolve, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi.
Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai using procedural gen-
eration.
Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, 35:5982–5994, 2022.
[16] Jeffrey Delmerico, Titus Cieslewski, Henri Rebecq,
Matthias Faessler, and Davide Scaramuzza.
Are we
ready for autonomous drone racing? the UZH-FPV drone
racing dataset. In IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. (ICRA),
2019.
[17] Maximilian Denninger, Martin Sundermeyer, Dominik
Winkelbauer, Dmitry Olefir, Tomas Hodan, Youssef Zi-
dan, Mohamad Elbadrawy, Markus Knauer, Harinandan
Katam, and Ahsan Lodhi.
Blenderproc: Reducing the
reality gap with photorealistic rendering. In International
Conference on Robotics: Sciene and Systems, RSS 2020,
2020.
[18] Yinpeng Dong, Caixin Kang, Jinlai Zhang, Zijian Zhu,
Yikai Wang, Xiao Yang, Hang Su, Xingxing Wei, and Jun
Zhu.
Benchmarking robustness of 3d object detection
to common corruption.
In IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 1022–
1032, 2023.
[19] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, An-
tonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An open urban
driving simulator. In Conference on robot learning, pages
1–16. PMLR, 2017.
[20] Kamak Ebadi, Lukas Bernreiter, Harel Biggie, Gavin
Catt, Yun Chang, Arghya Chatterjee, Christopher E. Den-
niston, Simon-Pierre Deschˆenes, Kyle Harlow, Shehryar
Khattak, Lucas Nogueira, Matteo Palieri, Pavel Petr´aˇcek,
Matˇej Petrl´ık, Andrzej Reinke, V´ıt Kr´atk´y, Shibo Zhao,
Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi, Kostas Alexis, Christoffer
Heckman, Kasra Khosoussi, Navinda Kottege, Benjamin
Morrell, Marco Hutter, Fred Pauling, Franc¸ois Pomer-
leau, Martin Saska, Sebastian Scherer, Roland Siegwart,
Jason L. Williams, and Luca Carlone.
Present and
future of slam in extreme environments: The darpa subt
challenge. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, pages 1–20,
2023.
[21] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are
we ready for autonomous driving? The KITTI Vision
Benchmark Suite.
In Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2012.
[22] Samuel W Hasinoff. Photon, poisson noise. Computer
Vision, A Reference Guide, 4(16):1, 2014.
[23] Michael Helmberger, Kristian Morin, Beda Berner, Ni-
tish Kumar, Giovanni Cioffi, and Davide Scaramuzza.
The hilti slam challenge dataset.
IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 7(3):7518–7525, 2022.
[24] Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking
neural network robustness to common corruptions and
perturbations. Proceedings of the International Confer-

<!-- page 23 -->
ence on Learning Representations, 2019.
[25] Matthew Johnson-Roberson, Charles Barto, Rounak
Mehta, Sharath Nittur Sridhar, Karl Rosaen, and Ram
Vasudevan. Driving in the matrix: Can virtual worlds re-
place human-generated annotations for real world tasks?
In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 746–753, 2017.
[26] Christoph Kamann and Carsten Rother. Benchmarking
the robustness of semantic segmentation models.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8828–8838, 2020.
[27] Christoph Kamann and Carsten Rother. Increasing the ro-
bustness of semantic segmentation models with painting-
by-numbers.
In European Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 369–387. Springer, 2020.
[28] Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquercio,
Matthias M¨uller, Vladlen Koltun, and Davide Scara-
muzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep rein-
forcement learning. Nature, 620(7976):982–987, 2023.
[29] Iman
Abaspur
Kazerouni,
Luke
Fitzgerald,
Gerard
Dooly, and Daniel Toal.
A survey of state-of-the-art
on visual slam. Expert Systems with Applications, 205:
117734, 2022.
[30] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallab-
hula, Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan,
and Jonathan Luiten.
Splatam: Splat, track map 3d
gaussians for dense rgb-d slam. arXiv, 2023.
[31] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
42(4), 2023.
[32] Nikhil Khedekar, Mihir Kulkarni, and Kostas Alexis.
Mimosa: A multi-modal slam framework for resilient
autonomy against sensor degradation. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS), pages 7153–7159, 2022.
[33] Tae Kyun Kim. T test as a parametric statistic. Korean
journal of anesthesiology, 68(6):540–546, 2015.
[34] Lingdong Kong, Youquan Liu, Xin Li, Runnan Chen,
Wenwei Zhang, Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Kai Chen, and
Ziwei Liu.
Robo3d: Towards robust and reliable 3d
perception against corruptions.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, pages 19994–20006, 2023.
[35] Xiang Li, Jinglu Wang, Xiaohao Xu, Xiao Li, Bhiksha
Raj, and Yan Lu. Robust referring video object segmen-
tation with cyclic structural consensus. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer
Vision, pages 22236–22245, 2023.
[36] Xin Li, Botian Shi, Yuenan Hou, Xingjiao Wu, Tianlong
Ma, Yikang Li, and Liang He.
Homogeneous multi-
modal feature fusion and interaction for 3d object de-
tection. In European Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 691–707, 2022.
[37] Andr´ea Macario Barros, Maugan Michel, Yoann Moline,
Gwenol´e Corre, and Fr´ed´erick Carrel. A comprehensive
survey of visual slam algorithms.
Robotics, 11(1):24,
2022.
[38] Will Maddern, Geoffrey Pascoe, Chris Linegar, and Paul
Newman. 1 year, 1000 km: The oxford robotcar dataset.
The International Journal of Robotics Research, 36(1):
3–15, 2017.
[39] Claudio Michaelis, Benjamin Mitzkus, Robert Geirhos,
Evgenia Rusak, Oliver Bringmann, Alexander S Ecker,
Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Benchmarking
robustness in object detection: Autonomous driving when
winter is coming.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07484,
2019.
[40] Seyed-Mohsen
Moosavi-Dezfooli,
Alhussein
Fawzi,
Omar Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Universal adversarial
perturbations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 1765–
1773, 2017.
[41] Ben Moseley, Valentin Bickel, Ignacio G L´opez-Francos,
and Loveneesh Rana. Extreme low-light environment-
driven image denoising over permanently shadowed lunar
regions with a physical noise model.
In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 6317–6327, 2021.
[42] Raul Mur-Artal, Jose Maria Martinez Montiel, and
Juan D Tardos.
Orb-slam: a versatile and accurate
monocular slam system. IEEE transactions on robotics,
31(5):1147–1163, 2015.
[43] Ra´ul Mur-Artal and Juan D. Tard´os.
Orb-slam2: An
open-source slam system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-
d cameras. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 33(5):1255–
1262, 2017.
[44] Manthan Patel, Marco Karrer, Philipp B¨anninger, and
Margarita Chli. Covins-g: A generic back-end for collab-
orative visual-inertial slam. In 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
2076–2082, 2023.
[45] Bernd Pfrommer, Nitin Sanket, Kostas Daniilidis, and
Jonas Cleveland. Penncosyvio: A challenging visual in-
ertial odometry benchmark. In 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages
3847–3854. IEEE, 2017.
[46] Julio A. Placed, Jared Strader, Henry Carrillo, Nikolay
Atanasov, Vadim Indelman, Luca Carlone, and Jos´e A.
Castellanos. A survey on active simultaneous localization
and mapping: State of the art and new frontiers. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, 39(3):1686–1705, 2023.
[47] Alexander Raistrick, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, Lingjie
Mei, Mingzhe Wang, Yiming Zuo, Karhan Kayan,
Hongyu Wen, Beining Han, Yihan Wang, et al. Infinite
photorealistic worlds using procedural generation.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12630–12641,
2023.
[48] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott
Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and
Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In

<!-- page 24 -->
International Conference on Machine Learning, pages
8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
[49] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz,
Patrick Esser, and Bj¨orn Ommer. High-resolution image
synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[50] Antoni Rosinol, Andrew Violette, Marcus Abate, Nathan
Hughes, Yun Chang, Jingnan Shi, Arjun Gupta, and Luca
Carlone. Kimera: From slam to spatial perception with
3d dynamic scene graphs. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 40(12-14):1510–1546, 2021.
[51] Antoni Rosinol, John J Leonard, and Luca Carlone.
Nerf-slam: Real-time dense monocular slam with neural
radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13641, 2022.
[52] Thomas Sayre-McCord, Winter Guerra, Amado An-
tonini, Jasper Arneberg, Austin Brown, Guilherme Cav-
alheiro, Yajun Fang, Alex Gorodetsky, Dave McCoy,
Sebastian Quilter, Fabian Riether, Ezra Tal, Yunus
Terzioglu, Luca Carlone, and Sertac Karaman. Visual-
inertial navigation algorithm development using photo-
realistic camera simulation in the loop. In 2018 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pages 2566–2573, 2018.
[53] David Schubert, Thore Goll, Nikolaus Demmel, Vla-
dyslav Usenko, J¨org St¨uckler, and Daniel Cremers. The
tum vi benchmark for evaluating visual-inertial odometry.
In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems, pages 1680–1687, 2018.
[54] Dave Shreiner et al. OpenGL programming guide: the
official guide to learning OpenGL, versions 3.0 and 3.1.
Pearson Education, 2009.
[55] Alvy Ray Smith.
Image compositing fundamentals.
Microsoft Corporation, 5, 1995.
[56] Charles Spearman.
The proof and measurement of
association between two things. 1961.
[57] Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen,
Erik Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J Engel, Raul Mur-
Artal, Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, et al.
The replica
dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces. arXiv preprint
arXiv:1906.05797, 2019.
[58] J¨urgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram
Burgard, and Daniel Cremers.
A benchmark for the
evaluation of rgb-d slam systems.
In 2012 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems, pages 573–580, 2012.
[59] Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J
Davison. imap: Implicit mapping and positioning in real-
time.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 6229–6238, 2021.
[60] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Droid-slam: Deep visual
slam for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. Advances
in neural information processing systems, 34:16558–
16569, 2021.
[61] Sebastian Thrun. Probabilistic robotics. Commun. ACM,
45(3):52–57, 2002.
[62] Yulun Tian, Yun Chang, Fernando Herrera Arias, Car-
los Nieto-Granda, Jonathan P. How, and Luca Carlone.
Kimera-multi: Robust, distributed, dense metric-semantic
slam for multi-robot systems.
IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, 38(4):2022–2038, 2022.
[63] Yulun Tian, Yun Chang, Long Quang, Arthur Schang,
Carlos Nieto-Granda, Jonathan P How, and Luca Car-
lone. Resilient and distributed multi-robot visual slam:
Datasets, experiments, and lessons learned.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2304.04362, 2023.
[64] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco:
A physics engine for model-based control.
In 2012
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, pages 5026–5033, 2012.
[65] Frederick Tung, Jianhui Chen, Lili Meng, and James J.
Little. The raincouver scene parsing benchmark for self-
driving in adverse weather and at night. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 2(4):2188–2193, 2017.
[66] Alexander Von Bernuth, Georg Volk, and Oliver Bring-
mann.
Simulating photo-realistic snow and fog on
existing images for enhanced cnn training and evalua-
tion. In 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems
Conference (ITSC), pages 41–46. IEEE, 2019.
[67] Hengyi Wang, Jingwen Wang, and Lourdes Agapito.
Co-slam: Joint coordinate and sparse parametric encod-
ings for neural real-time slam.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 13293–13302, 2023.
[68] Wenshan Wang, Delong Zhu, Xiangwei Wang, Yaoyu
Hu, Yuheng Qiu, Chen Wang, Yafei Hu, Ashish Kapoor,
and Sebastian Scherer. Tartanair: A dataset to push the
limits of visual slam. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pages 4909–4916. IEEE, 2020.
[69] Wenshan Wang, Yaoyu Hu, and Sebastian Scherer. Tar-
tanvo: A generalizable learning-based vo. In Conference
on Robot Learning, pages 1761–1772. PMLR, 2021.
[70] Hao Xu, Peize Liu, Xinyi Chen, and Shaojie Shen. D2
slam: Decentralized and distributed collaborative visual-
inertial slam system for aerial swarm.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2211.01538, 2022.
[71] Xiaohao Xu, Jinglu Wang, Xiang Ming, and Yan Lu.
Towards robust video object segmentation with adaptive
object calibration.
In Proceedings of the 30th ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, pages 2709–
2718, 2022.
[72] Naoki Yokoyama, Qian Luo, Dhruv Batra, and Sehoon
Ha. Benchmarking augmentation methods for learning
robust navigation agents: the winning entry of the 2021
igibson challenge.
In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pages 1748–1755. IEEE, 2022.
[73] Teng Yu, Kang Song, Pu Miao, Guowei Yang, Huan
Yang, and Chenglizhao Chen. Nighttime single image
dehazing via pixel-wise alpha blending. IEEE Access, 7:
114619–114630, 2019.

<!-- page 25 -->
[74] Lintong Zhang, Marco Camurri, and Maurice Fallon.
Multi-camera lidar inertial extension to the newer college
dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08854, 2021.
[75] Tan Zhang, Wenjun Zhang, and Madan M Gupta. Re-
silient robots: Concept, review, and future directions.
Robotics, 6(4):22, 2017.
[76] Tianyi Zhang and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Beyond
nerf underwater: Learning neural reflectance fields for
true color correction of marine imagery. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 8(10):6467–6474, 2023.
[77] Youmin Zhang, Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia, and Mat-
teo Poggi.
Go-slam: Global optimization for consis-
tent 3d instant reconstruction.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), October 2023.
[78] Shibo Zhao, Damanpreet Singh, Haoxiang Sun, Rushan
Jiang, YuanJun Gao, Tianhao Wu, Jay Karhade, Chuck
Whittaker, Ian Higgins, Jiahe Xu, et al. Subt-mrs: A sub-
terranean, multi-robot, multi-spectral and multi-degraded
dataset for robust slam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07607,
2023.
[79] Jia Zheng, Junfei Zhang, Jing Li, Rui Tang, Shenghua
Gao, and Zihan Zhou.
Structured3d: A large photo-
realistic dataset for structured 3d modeling. In Computer
Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference, Glas-
gow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IX 16,
pages 519–535. Springer, 2020.
[80] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu,
Hujun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and Marc
Pollefeys. Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding
for slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12786–
12796, 2022.
[81] David Zu˜niga-No¨el, Alberto Jaenal, Ruben Gomez-
Ojeda, and Javier Gonzalez-Jimenez. The uma-vi dataset:
Visual–inertial odometry in low-textured and dynamic
illumination environments. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 39(9):1052–1060, 2020.

<!-- page 26 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM Clean Mono
GO-SLAM Image Static Mono
GO-SLAM Image Dynamic Mono
GO-SLAM Faster Motion Mono
GO-SLAM Clean RGBD
GO-SLAM Image Static RGBD
GO-SLAM Image Dynamic RGBD
GO-SLAM Faster Motion RGBD
GO-SLAM Misalign Static RGBD
GO-SLAM Misalign Dynamic RGBD
GO-SLAM Depth Perturb RGBD
Nice-SLAM Image Static RGBD
Nice-SLAM Image Dynamic RGBD
Nice-SLAM Clean RGBD
Nice-SLAM Misalign Static RGBD
Nice-SLAM Misalign Dynamic RGBD
Nice-SLAM Faster Motion RGBD
Nice-SLAM Depth Perturb RGBD
CO-SLAM Clean RGBD
CO-SLAM Image Dynamic RGBD
CO-SLAM Image Static RGBD
CO-SLAM Faster Motion RGBD
CO-SLAM Misalign Static RGBD
CO-SLAM Depth Perturb RGBD
SplaTAM-S Clean RGBD
SplaTAM-S Image Static RGBD
SplaTAM-S Image Dynamic RGBD
SplaTAM-S Faster Motion RGBD
SplaTAM-S Misalign Static RGBD
SplaTAM-S Misalign Dynamic RGBD
SplaTAM-S Depth Perturb RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. J: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges for multiple types of perturbations. We
include the results within the range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and ≤0.02 [m] (Bottom). We present the results
of five SLAM models, including monocular&RGBD-based GO-SLAM [77], RGBD-based Nice-SLAM [80], RGBD-based
CO-SLAM [67], and RGBD-based SplaTAM-S [30], which highlights the vulnerability of current models to diverse types of
perturbations.

<!-- page 27 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM Mono
GO-SLAM RGBD
Nice-SLAM RGBD
CO-SLAM RGBD
SplaTAM-S RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. K: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges under the original clean setting. We include
the results within the ATE range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and ≤0.02 [m] (Bottom). We present the results
of five SLAM models, including monocular&RGBD-based GO-SLAM [77], RGBD-based Nice-SLAM [80], RGBD-based
CO-SLAM [67], and RGBD-based SplaTAM-S [30].

<!-- page 28 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM Mono
GO-SLAM RGBD
Nice-SLAM RGBD
CO-SLAM RGBD
SplaTAM-S RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. L: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges under the static mode of image-level
perturbations. We include the results within the ATE range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and ≤0.02 [m]
(Bottom). We present the results of five SLAM models, including monocular&RGBD-based GO-SLAM [77], RGBD-based
Nice-SLAM [80], RGBD-based CO-SLAM [67], and RGBD-based SplaTAM-S [30].

<!-- page 29 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM Mono
GO-SLAM RGBD
Nice-SLAM RGBD
CO-SLAM RGBD
SplaTAM-S RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. M: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges under the dynamic mode of image-level
perturbations. We include the results within the ATE range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and ≤0.02 [m]
(Bottom). We present the results of five SLAM models, including monocular&RGBD-based GO-SLAM [77], RGBD-based
Nice-SLAM [80], RGBD-based CO-SLAM [67], and RGBD-based SplaTAM-S [30].

<!-- page 30 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM Mono
GO-SLAM RGBD
CO-SLAM RGBD
SplaTAM-S RGBD
Nice-SLAM RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. N: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges under the faster motion effect. We include
the results within the ATE range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and ≤0.02 [m] (Bottom). We present the results
of five SLAM models, including monocular&RGBD-based GO-SLAM [77], RGBD-based Nice-SLAM [80], RGBD-based
CO-SLAM [67], and RGBD-based SplaTAM-S [30].

<!-- page 31 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM RGBD
Nice-SLAM RGBD
CO-SLAM Depth RGBD
SplaTAM-S RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. O: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges under the depth perturbation. We include
the results within the ATE range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and ≤0.02 [m] (Bottom). We present the results
of four RGBD SLAM models, including GO-SLAM [77], Nice-SLAM [80], CO-SLAM [67], and SplaTAM-S [30].

<!-- page 32 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM RGBD
Nice-SLAM RGBD
CO-SLAM RGBD
SplaTAM-S RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. P: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges under the static mode of the sensor
misalignment perturbation. We include the results within the ATE range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and
≤0.02 [m] (Bottom). We present the results of four RGBD-based SLAM models, including GO-SLAM [77], Nice-SLAM [80],
CO-SLAM [67], and SplaTAM-S [30].

<!-- page 33 -->
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
GO-SLAM RGBD
Nice-SLAM RGBD
CO-SLAM RGBD
SplaTAM-S RGBD
0.00
0.02
0.04
0.06
0.08
0.10
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
0.0000
0.0025
0.0050
0.0075
0.0100
0.0125
0.0150
0.0175
0.0200
ATE Threshold [m]
0
20
40
60
80
100
Cumulative Success Rate [%]
Fig. Q: Cumulative success rate measured at various ATE threshold ranges under the dynamic mode of the sensor
misalignment perturbation. We include the results within the ATE range of ≤1.0 [m] (Top), ≤0.1 [m] (Middle), and ≤0.02
[m] (Bottom). We present the results of four RGBD-based SLAM models, including GO-SLAM [77], Nice-SLAM [80], CO-
SLAM [67], and SplaTAM-S [30].

<!-- page 34 -->
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(a) No noise; MH01 sequence.
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(b) No noise; MH02 sequence.
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
x [m]
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(c) No noise; MH03 sequence.
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(d) η ∼N(0, 0.001); MH01 sequence.
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(e) η ∼N(0, 0.001); MH02 sequence.
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
x [m]
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(f) η ∼N(0, 0.001); MH03 sequence.
10
0
10
20
x [m]
20
15
10
5
0
5
10
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(g) η ∼N(0, 0.01); MH01 sequence.
10
0
10
20
x [m]
15
10
5
0
5
10
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(h) η ∼N(0, 0.01); MH02 sequence.
0
5
10
x [m]
6
4
2
0
2
4
6
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(i) η ∼N(0, 0.01); MH03 sequence.
Fig. R: Effect of perturbations on the stereo camera baseline for the ORBSLAM3 [7] SLAM model with the stereo input
setting. We introduce a random noise η along the axis of the stereo camera baseline. The noise is sampled from a Gaussian
distribution with zero mean and variance σ2, represented as η ∼N(0, σ2). Here, we show the qualitative comparisons on three
sequences of the EuRoC [5] dataset.

<!-- page 35 -->
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(a) No noise; MH01 sequence.
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(b) No noise; MH02 sequence.
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
x [m]
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(c) No noise; MH03 sequence.
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(d) η ∼N(0, 0.001); MH01 sequence.
5
0
5
x [m]
2
0
2
4
6
8
10
12
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(e) η ∼N(0, 0.001); MH02 sequence.
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
12.5
x [m]
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(f) η ∼N(0, 0.001); MH03 sequence.
5
0
5
x [m]
4
2
0
2
4
6
8
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(g) η ∼N(0, 0.01); MH01 sequence.
5
0
5
10
x [m]
5.0
2.5
0.0
2.5
5.0
7.5
10.0
7.5
10.0
Ground Truth 
Estimated
y [m]
(h) η ∼N(0, 0.01); MH02 sequence.
0
100
200
300
x [m]
0
50
100
150
200
250
300
y [m]
Ground Truth
Estimated
(i) η ∼N(0, 0.01); MH03 sequence.
Fig. S: Effect of perturbations on the stereo camera baseline for the ORBSLAM3 [7] SLAM model with the stereo-
inertia input setting. We introduce a random noise η along the axis of the stereo camera baseline. The noise is sampled
from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean and variance σ2, represented as η ∼N(0, σ2). Here, we show the qualitative
comparisons on three sequences of the EuRoC [5] dataset.

<!-- page 36 -->
Fig. T: Qualitative results of the successful cases of ORBSLAM3 model [7] with the RGBD input.
Fig. U: Qualitative results of the failure cases of ORBSLAM3 model [7] with the RGBD input.

<!-- page 37 -->
Poor appearance reconstruction.
Good geometry reconstruction.
Fig. V: Qualitative results of successful cases of Nice-SLAM model [80] with the RGBD input.
Fig. W: Qualitative results of the failure cases of Nice-SLAM model [80] with the RGBD input.

<!-- page 38 -->
More deviated trajectory prediction
More deviated trajectory prediction
Smoother trajectory prediction
Smoother trajectory prediction
Estimated Trajectory
Camera Pose
Fig. X: Qualitative results of successful cases of SplaTAM-S model [30] with the RGBD input.

<!-- page 39 -->
Estimated Trajectory
Camera Pose
Fail to track and reconstruct!
Fig. Y: Qualitative results of the failure cases of SplaTAM-S model [80] with the RGBD input.

<!-- page 40 -->
Fail to track and reconstruct!
Fail to track and reconstruct!
Estimated Trajectory
Camera Pose
Fig. Z: Qualitative results of the failure cases of SplaTAM-S model [80] with the RGBD input.
