<!-- page 1 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
Seongbo Ha , Jiung Yeon , and Hyeonwoo Yu
Sungkyunkwan University, Suwon, South Korea
{sobo3607,wcr12st,hwyu}@skku.edu
Abstract. Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) with dense repre-
sentation plays a key role in robotics, Virtual Reality (VR), and Augmented
Reality (AR) applications. Recent advancements in dense representation SLAM
have highlighted the potential of leveraging neural scene representation and 3D
Gaussian representation for high-fidelity spatial representation. In this paper, we
propose a novel dense representation SLAM approach with a fusion of Gener-
alized Iterative Closest Point (G-ICP) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS). In
contrast to existing methods, we utilize a single Gaussian map for both track-
ing and mapping, resulting in mutual benefits. Through the exchange of covari-
ances between tracking and mapping processes with scale alignment techniques,
we minimize redundant computations and achieve an efficient system. Addition-
ally, we enhance tracking accuracy and mapping quality through our keyframe
selection methods. Experimental results demonstrate the effectiveness of our ap-
proach, showing an incredibly fast speed up to 107 FPS (for the entire system)
and superior quality of the reconstructed map.
The code is available at: https://github.com/Lab-of-AI-and-Robotics/GS-ICP-SLAM
Video is: https://youtu.be/ebHh_uMMxE
Keywords: Coordinate-based 3D Representation · G-ICP · SLAM
1
Introduction
Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is an algorithm that constructs
maps of unknown environments while localizing poses of vision sensors simultane-
ously. As the influence of 3D visual SLAM in the fields of robotics, Virtual Reality
(VR), and Augmented Reality (AR) has increased, higher rendering performance and
more accurate trajectory are required. Thus, 3D reconstruction methods such as Signed
Distance Field (SDF), and Truncated Signed Distance Field (TSDF) are utilized for
traditional dense visual SLAM [3,5,10,27,30,42].
Recently, coordinate-based 3D Implicit Neural Representation (INR) [23] has been
proposed for representing spatial information using neural radiance fields, showcasing
high novel view synthesis capabilities and high-fidelity spatial representation prowess.
Various approaches [8, 18, 32, 39, 45, 47] have been attempted to utilize INR for the
real-time SLAM mapping process. However, INR requires computationally intensive
raycasting to synthesize images, thus the rendering process in INR-based SLAM incurs
significant time overhead, slowing down map optimization and rendering-loss based
tracking. In contrast, coordinate-based 3D explicit representation such as 3D Gaussian
arXiv:2403.12550v2  [cs.CV]  22 Mar 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
2
Seongbo Ha et al.
Fig. 1: A comparison of PSNR with respect to FPS of entire system in recent research on SLAM
algorithm utilizing dense representation such as neural scene representation and 3D Gaussian
representation. Our method achieves state-of-the-art performance in rendering evaluation and
FPS of entire system. Note that this FPS represents the overall system performance. Reported
values are average of Replica 8 scenes.
Splatting (3DGS) [15] represents the 3D space using 3D Gaussians as primitives, al-
lowing for rendering speeds faster than NeRF using the rasterization method [43]. This
rapid rendering capability of 3DGS results in fast optimization of 3D spatial informa-
tion, making it suitable for dense representation in SLAM [12,14,22,44].
Although 3DGS-based SLAM methods take advantages of the high-speed render-
ing, they fail to address the fundamental issue: the inability to directly utilize 3D explicit
representations and the indirect tracking of 3D space through 2D image rendering. Even
with the majority of current 3DGS-based SLAM [12, 14, 22, 32, 44] utilizing RGB-D
data, the use of explicit representations is overlooked. For example, INR-based meth-
ods [32,39,47] and 3DGS-based methods [14,22,44] employ photometric-error based
techniques, which estimate the optimal pose by iteratively minimizing the error between
rendered and observed 2D images. However, due to limitations in tracking speed and
performance, decoupled approaches [8,12,18] have been proposed incorporating well-
crafted visual odometries [4,26] into the tracking process. Although decoupled methods
exhibit better performances in tracking by separating mapping and tracking processes,
they require additional computational resources for the independent stages. Moreover,
these methods need to store features in 3D space, unrelated to the 3D GS map.
There exists a method that allows Gaussian, an explicit representation, to be directly
used for tracking. The well-known Generalized Iterative Closest Point (G-ICP) [17,33]
from the 3D scan matching family is simple yet efficient for fast tracking of 3D point
clouds. During preprocessing, it only requires computing Gaussians for the current
frame and the map. Given that the map in 3DGS utilizes Gaussians as an explicit rep-
resentation in 3D space, using G-ICP for tracking allows for the direct utilization of
the 3DGS map without the need for post-processing. Furthermore, the Gaussians of the
current frame computed during tracking with G-ICP can also be directly utilized as an
explicit representation in the 3DGS map, without additional computations.
Therefore, we propose a dense representation SLAM framework that integrates G-
ICP and 3DGS, allowing them to complement each other by sharing explicit repre-

<!-- page 3 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
3
sentations. Unlike traditional methods, our approach actively leverages 3D information
through the utilization of G-ICP for tracking. The proposed method is a coupled ap-
proach that shares a single map during tracking and mapping processes, while main-
taining fast tracking speed akin to decoupled approaches. Previous works using decou-
pled methods [8,12,18] require separate maps containing ORB feature information for
tracking, along with additional resources and computations needed to obtain ORB fea-
tures. Moreover, the values obtained during tracking are not utilized in mapping. Our
approach exploits the covariance of each point computed during the G-ICP-based track-
ing process as the initial state of the 3DGS mapping. Meanwhile, the 3D Gaussians in
the 3DGS map are also mutually used as 3D points and their covariances which are
essential for G-ICP-based tracking, discarding the necessity to recalculate the covari-
ances of the map. This is possible because the covariances of points computed during
the G-ICP process and the 3D Gaussians representing the map commonly contain in-
formation about the surrounding space. In other words, G-ICP and 3DGS can share
the same Gaussian world. Therefore, our system minimizes unnecessary computations
and facilitates efficient system configuration by mutually utilizing the key elements,
Gaussians, between tracking and mapping processes. To ensure optimal performance
in tracking and mapping sharing information between G-ICP and 3DGS, we also intro-
duce several techniques such as scale alignment. To summarize, our contributions are
as follows:
– We present a real-time dense representation SLAM that combines G-ICP and 3DGS,
achieving extremely high speed of the entire system (up to 107 FPS) and superior
quality of the map.
– By incorporating G-ICP for tracking, our system utilizes 3D information actively
and significantly reduces the time required for the tracking process.
– Reduction of computational cost and facilitating rapid convergence of primitives
of 3DGS is achieved by sharing the covariances of G-ICP and 3DGS with scale
aligning techniques.
2
Related Work
G-ICP Scan-matching focuses on the registration of two point clouds that observe
similar environments by selecting a transformation matrix that minimizes errors be-
tween two point clouds [2]. Iterative Closest Point (ICP) [1] algorithm is a widely used
and influential method in the scan-matching area. ICP iteratively estimates point cor-
respondences and finds a transformation that minimizes Euclidean distance between
corresponding points, thereby optimizing the registration of point clouds. Because of
simplicity and speed of ICP, there are many follow-up studies [7,20,33,34,41]. To im-
prove robustness, Trimmed-ICP [7], proposed a method for correspondence selection.
Point-to-plane ICP [20] augmented robustness and accuracy by taking point-to-plane
distance as objective function. G-ICP [33] introduced probabilistic models to general-
ize ICP yielding notable improvements in robustness and accuracy. Scan matching is a
common technique used in SLAM for pose tracking [6,11,21,28,29], and for enhanced
robustness, feature-based scan matching is often employed [19,35,36,46].
SLAM with Dense Representation SLAM with dense representation [9, 16] aims to

<!-- page 4 -->
4
Seongbo Ha et al.
construct maps in a dense form to enable interaction with the map in tasks such as AR,
robotics, etc. To achieve this, classic approaches [3,5,10,27,30,42] creates dense maps
by representing space in Signed Distance Field (SDF), and Truncated Signed Distance
Field (TSDF), rather than in sparse forms such as point clouds or grids.
Recently, dense representation SLAM methods represent maps by utilizing NeRF
[23], which demonstrates high spatial representation capabilities have been proposed.
iMAP [39], NICE-SLAM [47], Point-SLAM [32], ESLAM [13] perform tracking by
optimizing camera poses by reducing errors between synthesized and observed im-
ages. These methods have limitations in tracking speed and performance. Alternatively,
Orbeez-SLAM [8], vMAP [18] incorporate well-crafted visual SLAM techniques into
the tracking process, making mapping and tracking operate independently. Orbeez-
SLAM utilizes ORB-SLAM2 [26] for tracking and instant-ngp [24] for learning spatial
information to perform mapping. In a similar context, vMAP utilizes ORB-SLAM3 [4]
for tracking while employing separate Multi-layer perceptrons [40] for each object to
effectively represent the entire space.
3DGS represents space in explicit form using 3D gaussians as primitives. It of-
fers a level of high-fidelity spatial representation similar to NeRF but provides sig-
nificantly faster rendering speeds. To leverage this advantage to dense representation
SLAM, several approaches [12, 14, 22, 44] utilizing 3DGS for space representation
have been proposed. Among them, GS-SLAM [44], SplaTAM [14], Gaussian Splat-
ting SLAM [22] perform tracking using dense photometric error. While 3DGS shows
significantly improved rendering performance compared to NeRF, the tracking meth-
ods based on dense photometric error still suffer from tracking speed. To tackle this
problem, Photo-SLAM [12] integrates ORB-SLAM3 for tracking, in a similar manner
to Orbeez-SLAM and vMAP.
3
Method
To mutually benefit tracking and mapping, we introduce the fusion of G-ICP and GS,
each representing the tracking and mapping processes, respectively. The key insight
of our approach is that covariance can be considered as a fundamental common factor
for this fusion. Suppose we have a point set (point cloud) X = {xm}m=1,...,M and
its corresponding covariance set C = {Cm}m=1,...,M, where x = [x, y, z]T . The co-
variance C of one 3D point x is given by computing covariance matrix of k-nearest
neighbors of x. Let us define G = {X, C} as a set of Gaussian. G-ICP aims to
find a transformation T that maximally aligns the source Gaussians (current frame)
Gs = {X s, Cs} and the target Gaussians (map) Gt = {X t, Ct}. Assume we know
the correspondences between X s and X t determined by nearest neighbor search. For
example, we have {xs
i}i=1,...,N ⊂X s, {Cs
i }i=1,...,N ⊂Cs and {xt
i}i=1,...,N ⊂X t,
{Ct
i}i=1,...,N ⊂Ct, where xs
i is associated with xt
i. To find the optimal transform T∗,
we exploit not the single point but the distribution of that point defined as a Gaussian
distribution: xi ∼N(ˆxi, Ci). Let di = xt
i −Txs
i be the error term, and if we assume
that there is an optimal transformation T∗, it is clear that xt
i = T∗xs
i thus ˆdi = 0. Since
we assume x is a Gaussian random variable, di is also a Gaussian random variable as

<!-- page 5 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
5
Fig. 2: System Overview. The input of our system is RGBD frame. We generate a point cloud
by downsampling and reprojecting the current depth image and utilize it in the GICP process.
During the GICP process, we create source Gaussians from the point cloud and estimate the
current camera pose by aligning them with target Gaussians, which are a subset of the 3D GS
map. If the current frame is identified as a keyframe or a mapping-only keyframe, we add the
source Gaussians to the 3D GS map as new primitives. Meanwhile, in the mapping process, we
optimize the Gaussians along with the color and opacity set of the Gaussians concurrently with
the tracking process.
the following:
  \ no numb er
 d _i &
 \sim \
m athca
l  {N} (
 \ ha
t  {d}_
i , C_i ^
t  + \ ma
t h bf {
T }^* C _i^s (\mathbf {T}^*)^T ) \\ \nonumber &= \mathcal {N} ( \hat {x}^t_i - \mathbf {T}^*\hat {x}^s_i, C_i^t + \mathbf {T}^* C_i^s (\mathbf {T}^*)^T ) \\ \nonumber & =\mathcal {N}(0, C_i^t + \mathbf {T}^* C_i^s (\mathbf {T}^*)^T ) .
To find the optimal transform T∗for X s and X t, we use maximum likelihood estima-
tion (MLE) as the following:
  \ nonumb
e
r
 
\
m athb f  {T}^*
 
&
 
=
 \a rgmax
 _\math
b
f
 
{
T}
 
\
pr
o d  _i
^ N p\l eft (d_i\right ) = \argmax _\mathbf {T} \sum _i^N \log p(d_i) \\ \label {MLE_for_T} & = \argmin _\mathbf {T} \sum _i^N d_i^T \left (C_i^B + \mathbf {T} C_i^A \mathbf {T}^T\right )^{-1} d_i .
(1)
Therefore, T∗can be used as the relative pose between the current frame Gs = {X s, Cs}
and the map Gt = {X t, Ct}.
Meanwhile, for mapping purposes, GS also relies on Gaussians G = {X, C} of
the 3D scene representation. Different from G-ICP, GS aims to find the optimal co-
ordinates of the Gaussians X ∗= {x∗
m}m=1,...,M and the optimal covariances C∗=
{C∗
m}m=1,...,M as the following:
  \ non umb er  \label
 {3DGS_
error } \ bold s ymbol {\ma thc al { X }}^* , \ boldsymbol {\mathcal {C}}^*, \boldsymbol {H}^*, \boldsymbol {O}^* = \argmin _{ \boldsymbol {\mathcal {X}}, \boldsymbol {\mathcal {C}}, \boldsymbol {H}, \boldsymbol {O} } \lambda _{I_1} \boldsymbol {\mathcal {L}}_1 \left (I, I_{gt}\right ) + \lambda _{I_2} \boldsymbol {\mathcal {L}}_{D-SSIM} \left (I, I_{gt}\right ) + \lambda _D \boldsymbol {\mathcal {L}}_1 \left (D,D_{gt}\right )
where H = {hm}m=1,...,M and O = {om}m=1,...,M are the color set and the opacity
set of 3D points which are for the RGBD image rendering. I and D are the rendered
RGB and depth images obtained by performing rasterization using G, H and O.
Note that in G-ICP and GS, the key common factor is Gaussians G = {X, C},
allowing these Gaussians to be shared mutually. During G-ICP tracking, the covariance

<!-- page 6 -->
6
Seongbo Ha et al.
of each frame is computed. Hence, when adding keyframes to expand the 3D GS map,
there is no need to recalculate C for every expansion. Also, G-ICP does not need to
compute the covariances of the map because our GS map already contains Gaussians.
Moreover, G-ICP, by aligning frames based on 3D geometric structure, inherently ini-
tializes a certain number of points and their coordinates that aptly represent the 3D
structure. Therefore, it brings about an effect where an appropriate number of points
and their poses are initialized, well-suited for depicting the 3D structure, significantly
reducing the learning time to find the optimal pose X ∗and the optimal covariance C∗
of Gaussians G in GS. Additionally, in the same vein, calculations like densifying or
opacity reset to adjust the number of 3D points in GS become unnecessary. Conse-
quently, by sharing a common source, each process becomes mutually beneficial, and
the speed of execution accelerates due to reduced redundant computations. Our method
can be simplified as follows:
1. Use G-ICP to align the current frame with the 3D GS map which contains covari-
ance (solely need to compute the covariance for the current frame).
2. When adding keyframes to the 3D GS map, utilize the covariance computed in
GICP during tracking (no need for densifying or opacity reset).
3. Repeat steps 1-2.
The overview of our system is shown in Fig. 2. The detailed implementations of the
proposed technique are introduced in the following Section.
3.1
G-ICP Tracking
Scale Regularization When using G-ICP for tracking, aligning the scale of the current
frame with the map enables high-performance camera pose estimation [33]. Given the
covariance C, scale S = [s2, s1, s0]T is given by the singular value decomposition
(SVD) as the following:
  C = \boldsymbol {R} \boldsymbol {\Lambda }^2 \boldsymbol {R}^T
(2)
where Λ = diag (s2, s1, s0) ∀s2 > s1 > s0 is a scale matrix and R is the orientation
of the Gaussian. To achieve the robust scan matching performance, point-to-plane ICP
or voxelized point-to-plane ICP adopt a regularizing method that makes the scale as
S = [1, 1, ϵ]T in order to treat each Gaussian as a plane-like distribution.
In our framework, we utilize target Gaussians Gt = {X t, Ct} from the 3D GS map
for tracking. Here, Ct is optimized to represent the scene accurately, Gt involves not
only planes but also lines, corners, and other features. Therefore, while tracking, instead
of regularizing the scale into a plane-based form, preserving the original characteristics
of the target Gaussians while performing regularization is more appropriate. Thus, in
our framework, we propose the following ellipse regularization:
  \
b
oldsym bol {\L ambd a } ^\prime = \frac {1}{median\left (\boldsymbol {S}\right )} diag \left (s_2, s_1, s_0\right )
(3)
where Λ′ is the ellipse-regularized scale matrix.

<!-- page 7 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
7
(a)
(b)
Fig. 3: Tracking Accuracy Comparison Based on Keyframe Selection Methods. The reported
values represent the average results across eight scenes from the Replica dataset [37]. When se-
lecting keyframes every n frame (depicted in blue), the tracking accuracy is notably low. Con-
versely, our keyframe selection method yielded the highest tracking accuracy.
Keyframe Selection Similar to [25,31], we perform dynamic keyframe selection. Con-
sidering the geometric structure is critical for both G-ICP tracking and GS mapping, we
exploit the geometric correspondence computed from G-ICP. As Eqn. (1) denotes, we
can get the distance between xs
i and xt
i as an interim result of G-ICP procedure without
additional calculations. So we can efficiently determine the correspondence by setting
the distance threshold.
By considering the proportion of correspondences between the current frame and
map, we select keyframes while taking into account the characteristics of the scene.
In more detail, if the proportion in the current frame goes below specific thresholds,
the frame is selected as a keyframe. This allows us to achieve consistent tracking per-
formance while simultaneously maintaining a consistent density of Gaussians G =
{X, C} added to the map. The effect of this keyframe selection is shown in Fig. 3 (a).
Note that, from selected keyframe, only Gaussians that do not overlap with the
existing current map are considered as target Gaussians. This is because errors due to
discrepancies during tracking are conveyed intactly when incorporating into the map.
These accumulated errors result in low tracking accuracy. This strategy ensures more
accurate tracking results and improves the overall robustness of the system.
3.2
GS Mapping
Scale Aligning Suppose we have a fully trained 3D GS map. Since the 3D GS map is
trained to represent the scene from any viewpoint, Gaussians G should be uniformly
distributed according to the structure of the 3D space. However, single frames obtained
from radiance sensors such as RGBD cameras or LiDAR yield sparse representations of
the 3D space as the distance from the sensor increases, due to the inherent characteris-
tics of the sensor. In other words, as the distance from the sensor increases, the spacing
between 3D points widens, and the scale of the corresponding covariance calculated
based on the k-nearest neighbors becomes excessively large. Adding such single frames
as keyframes to the map during real-time training of GS mapping leads to an imbalance
in the scale of Gaussians, ultimately resulting in a decrease in mapping performance .
Therefore, to fundamentally alleviate the problem, our proposed method suggests the

<!-- page 8 -->
8
Seongbo Ha et al.
Fig. 4: Separated Keyframe Selection on Replica office4. We demonstrate that a small num-
ber of tracking keyframes yield accurate trajectory estimation (case 1), while a large number of
mapping keyframes result in high rendering performance (case 2). Thus, our method adopts case
3 that select tracking keyframe and mapping keyframe separately at different intervals.
following scale normalization for the current frame:
  \ n o
nu mber \boldsymbol {\Lambda }^{\prime \prime } = \frac {1}{z^p}\boldsymbol {\Lambda }^\prime .
Where Λ′′ is the normalized scale matrix and p is the parameter which is empirically
determined. By adding such scale-normalized keyframes to the map to expand it, not
only does the GS mapping performance increase, but also the performance of G-ICP
tracking improves.
Additional Keyframe Selection for Mapping Mapping based on GS benefits from
having a diverse set of frames from various viewpoints for training, as performance
improves with a larger number of available frames. However, increasing the number of
selected keyframes during tracking can lead to a degradation in tracking performance
due to accumulated errors, as is common with G-ICP-based methods. To mitigate this
issue, we propose adding mapping-only keyframe selection in addition to the existing
keyframe selection process. In other words, tracking continues to proceed from selected
keyframes in the existing tracking process, while mapping utilizes both the original
keyframes and additional mapping-only keyframes.
The overview of the additional keyframe selection is illustrated in Fig. 4. Cases 1
and 2 represent scenarios without considering mapping-only keyframes. In Case 1, to
increase the number of keyframes, if no keyframe satisfying the criteria is found up to
the 30th frame from the previous keyframe, the 30th frame is selected as a keyframe.
However, since this may not yield sufficient mapping performance, as shown in Case 2,
adding an additional keyframe at the 10th frame can be considered. While this approach
improves mapping performance as desired, it leads to a decline in tracking performance
due to accumulated scan matching errors. To alleviate this, as shown in Case 3, we pro-
pose adding the 10th frame as a mapping-only frame, allowing us to maximize tracking
performance while simultaneously maximizing mapping performance. The effect of the
proposed scheme, Case 3, is shown in Fig. 3 (b). Note that since G-ICP, which performs
tracking, computes covariance for all frames anyway, there is no difference in the over-
all computational load.

<!-- page 9 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
9
Avoiding Local Minima while Mapping GS SLAM differs from traditional GS in that
it operates in real-time and often lacks sufficient observations of the scene. Moreover,
since it operates in real-time, focusing solely on images from the current viewpoint or
nearby viewpoints during training can easily lead to local minima and degrade mapping
quality [22]. For instance, GS simply considers image rendering from specific view-
points, thus if we continuously train only on a specific viewpoint, the scale of Gaussians
in the map tends to elongate in the direction of that viewpoint, leading to local minima.
To overcome this challenge, at each training iteration, we adopt a strategy of ran-
domly choosing one keyframe for learning among the selected keyframes so far, en-
suring that both the current observed scene and the entire map are uniformly learned.
Additionally, we prune Gaussians that fall into local minima during training to improve
mapping performance and ensure robust tracking through geometric preservation.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
We evaluate the proposed method on Replica dataset [37] and TUM dataset [38]. Replica
dataset contains synthetic scenes and high-quality RGB/depth images rendered from
these scenes. TUM dataset includes images captured in the real world, with signif-
icant noise and blur, resulting in poor quality. Particularly, many parts of the depth
images suffer from information loss. We validate the effectiveness of our approach
by evaluating it on both synthetic and real-world datasets. All experiments are per-
formed in a desktop with a Ryzen 7 7800x3d CPU, 32GB RAM, and an NVIDIA RTX
4090 24GB GPU. To evaluate camera tracking accuracy, we use the Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE) of the Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE). For the quality of the recon-
structed map, we report standard photometric rendering quality metrics (PSNR, SSIM,
and LPIPS). The code will be released upon acceptance of the paper.
4.2
Camera Tracking Accuracy
Tab. 1, Tab. 2 shows the tracking accuracy of our method compared to other approaches
on both synthetic [37] and real-world [38] datasets. On Replica [37], the proposed
method achieved state-of-the-art (SOTA) performance across all scenes, reducing the
trajectory error by more than 50% compared to the previous SOTA. This result arises
from the fact that our proposed method actively utilizes 3D information by employing
G-ICP [33] for tracking, unlike other methods that perform tracking based on errors
in 2D space. On TUM [38], our method outperforms coupled methods [14, 32, 44, 47]
which conduct tracking and mapping based on a single map. Decoupled method [12]
and its baseline method [4] show better performance, but these approaches require ad-
ditional resources for storing separate map information and costly computations for
extracting features solely for the tracking process.
4.3
System Speed and Quality of Reconstructed Map
Tab. 3 and Tab. 4 demonstrates the FPS of the systems and quality of the reconstructed
map on Replica [37] and TUM [38] dataset, respectively. FPS of the system is calculated

<!-- page 10 -->
10
Seongbo Ha et al.
Table 1: Tracking Performance on Replica (ATE RMSE ↓[cm]). Our method achieves state-
of-the-art performance in camera pose estimation. The result of GS-SLAM is taken from [44].
And the result of Photo-SLAM is obtained from [12].
Method
R0
R1
R2 Of0 Of1 Of2 Of3 Of4 Avg.
NICE-SLAM* [47]
1.61 1.48 1.61 0.95 0.81 1.46 1.76 1.69 1.42
Point-SLAM* [32]
0.59 0.51 0.32 0.45 0.46 0.48 0.61 0.87 0.54
GS-SLAM [44]
0.48 0.53 0.33 0.52 0.41 0.59 0.46 0.70 0.50
Photo-SLAM [12]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.60
SplaTAM* [14]
0.29 0.35 0.28 0.49 0.21 0.31 0.34 0.57 0.36
Ours (limited to 30 FPS) 0.15 0.16 0.11 0.18 0.12 0.17 0.16 0.21 0.16
* denotes the reproduced results by running official code.
Table 2: Tracking Performance on TUM-RGBD (ATE RMSE ↓[cm]). We divide systems into
decoupled and coupled systems. Among coupled systems, we achieve competitive performance
in camera pose estimation. The result of GS-SLAM is taken from [44]. And the results of ORB-
SLAM3 and Photo-SLAM are obtained from [12].
Method
fr1/desk fr2/xyz fr3/office Avg.
Decoupled ORB-SLAM3 [4]
1.7
0.4
1.7
1.3
Photo-SLAM [12]
2.6
0.3
1.0
1.3
Coupled
NICE-SLAM* [47]
2.8
2.1
7.2
4.0
Point-SLAM* [32]
2.7
1.3
3.9
2.6
GS-SLAM [44]
3.3
1.3
6.6
3.7
SplaTAM* [14]
3.3
1.3
5.1
3.2
Ours (limited to 30 FPS)
2.7
1.8
2.7
2.4
* denotes the reproduced results by running official code.
by dividing the total number of frames by the total time. Note that this FPS represents
the overall system performance, encompassing the entire system including tracking and
mapping processes, rather than just individual components. Photo-SLAM [12] reported
the tracking FPS of their system, but did not include the system FPS, so we leave that
field blank in the Tab. 4.
Since our method implements mapping and tracking processes to operate in paral-
lel, the number of map optimization iterations varies depending on the tracking speed,
consequently affecting the quality of the reconstructed map. So we evaluate our system
in two cases: one where the tracking speed is limited to the typical sensor input speed
of 30 FPS, and the other where the tracking speed is not limited.
In the limited case (30 FPS), our system achieves SOTA map quality across all
scenes in the Replica dataset. When the tracking speed is not limited, our method shows
extremely fast system speed up to 107 FPS. This speed is more than four times faster
than that of the Orbeez-SLAM [8], based on the ORB-SLAM2 [26]. Remarkably, even
under this condition, our approach maintains superior map quality and outperforms
other methods. The proposed method effectively integrates Gaussians for map repre-
sentation with appropriate initial states and has better-detailed representation capability
compared to NeRF-based methods. As shown in Fig. 5, SplaTAM suffers from incor-

<!-- page 11 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
11
porating appropriate Gaussians into the map, leading to regions of poor quality. Point-
SLAM exhibits areas where detailed representation is lacking.
In TUM-RGBD, our method demonstrates remarkably fast system speed with com-
petitive map quality, showcasing its practicality in real-world scenarios. Compared to
Table 3: Evaluation of System Speed and Map Quality on Replica. Our method outperforms
all other frameworks in both system speed and quality of the reconstructed map.
Methods
Metrics
R0
R1
R2
Of0
Of1
Of2
Of3
Of4
Avg.
Orbeez-SLAM* [8]
PSNR[dB] ↑12.13 15.28 15.87 17.59 19.26 10.30 11.55 12.65 14.33
SSIM ↑
0.699 0.787 0.808 0.795 0.672 0.783 0.760 0.838 0.768
LPIPS ↓
0.612 0.477 0.509 0.515 0.413 0.554 0.540 0.528 0.529
FPS ↑
24.05 24.78 24.00 19.22 26.74 23.88 24.45 26.11 24.15
Point-SLAM* [32]
PSNR[dB] ↑33.38 34.10 36.32 38.72 39.31 34.22 34.10 34.82 35.62
SSIM ↑
0.979 0.977 0.985 0.985 0.987 0.962 0.963 0.981 0.977
LPIPS ↓
0.097 0.115 0.101 0.089 0.110 0.152 0.119 0.131 0.114
FPS ↑
0.26
0.30
0.31
0.33
0.34
0.30
0.28
0.30
0.30
GS-SLAM [44]
PSNR[dB] ↑31.56 32.86 32.59 38.70 41.17 32.36 32.03 32.92 34.27
SSIM ↑
0.968 0.973 0.971 0.986 0.993 0.978 0.970 0.968 0.975
LPIPS ↓
0.094 0.075 0.093 0.050 0.033 0.094 0.110 0.112 0.082
FPS ↑
8.34
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
8.34
SplaTAM* [14]
PSNR[dB] ↑32.60 33.55 34.83 38.09 39.02 31.95 29.53 31.55 33.89
SSIM ↑
0.975 0.969 0.982 0.982 0.982 0.966 0.949 0.951 0.970
LPIPS ↓
0.070 0.097 0.074 0.088 0.093 0.098 0.119 0.150 0.099
FPS ↑
0.24
0.19
0.19
0.20
0.22
0.27
0.26
0.24
0.23
Ours (no tracking speed limit)
PSNR[dB] ↑32.20 35.36 34.42 40.31 40.75 33.85 34.08 36.47 35.93
SSIM ↑
0.940 0.960 0.957 0.978 0.977 0.962 0.953 0.963 0.962
LPIPS ↓
0.081 0.067 0.083 0.045 0.051 0.069 0.067 0.065 0.066
FPS ↑
100.98 84.92 103.38 99.10 107.06 95.60 97.20 96.66 98.11
Ours (limited to 30 FPS)
PSNR[dB] ↑35.37 37.80 38.50 43.13 43.26 36.93 36.90 38.75 38.83
SSIM ↑
0.963 0.971 0.975 0.986 0.985 0.974 0.969 0.973 0.975
LPIPS ↓
0.048 0.045 0.048 0.026 0.029 0.043 0.042 0.045 0.041
FPS ↑
29.97 29.98 29.98 29.98 29.99 29.97 29.97 29.97 29.98
* denotes the reproduced results by running official code.
The result of GS-SLAM is taken from [44].
Table 4: Evaluation of System Speed and Map Quality on TUM-RGBD. Proposed method
shows incredible system speed and competitive map quality.
Methods
PSNR[dB] ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓FPS ↑
NICE-SLAM* [47]
14.10
0.574
0.395
0.08
Point-SLAM* [32]
21.40
0.738
0.447
0.22
Photo-SLAM [12]
21.90
0.763
0.187
-
SplaTAM* [14]
23.46
0.906
0.156
0.32
Ours (unlimited tracking speed)
19.62
0.750
0.240
73.92
Ours (limited to 30 FPS)
20.72
0.768
0.218
29.99
* denotes the reproduced results by running official code.
The result of Photo-SLAM is taken from [12].

<!-- page 12 -->
12
Seongbo Ha et al.
Fig. 5: Comparison of Rendering Results. In the first scene, SplaTAM [14] failed to reconstruct
the pillow and lamp. Point-SLAM [32] failed to represent the detailed pattern of the pillow. In the
second case, SplaTAM and Point-SLAM failed to accurately reconstruct the details of the clock.
However, our method exhibits rendering results that closely resemble the ground truth image,
demonstrating a high level of accuracy.
SplaTAM [14], our approach shows a slight decrease in map quality, with a PSNR re-
duction of approximately 11.7%. However, we achieve significant speed improvements,
with a speedup of approximately 91.6 times under limited conditions and up to 227
times at maximum speed. The reason is that, unlike Replica, TUM dataset is captured
with old-fashioned sensors, resulting in noisy and substantial information loss in depth
images. While SplaTAM treats these factors by adding new Gaussians only in regions
with significant depth loss, our method utilizes all structural information from the depth
image, focusing on accurate tracking and rapid system rather than treating such factors.
4.4
Ablation study
Table 5: Scale Regularization Ablation on TUM-RGBD. Reported results are the average ATE
RMSE ↓[cm] of 3 scenes in TUM-RGBD dataset.
Scale Regularization fr1-desk fr2-xyz fr3-office Avg.
✗
136.32 196.61
376.40
236.54
Plane
65.63
5.53
16.21
29.12
Ellipse
2.66
1.77
2.67
2.37
Scale Regularization Tab. 5 shows the result of the ablation study on scale regular-
ization while tracking. We perform scale regularization to enhance tracking accuracy
by ensuring that the scales of Gaussians in the current frame and the map are within
a similar range. Despite the application of plane regularization resulting in some im-
provement in tracking accuracy, it remains inadequate. This is because the plane regu-
larization method considers all the Gaussians as planes, ignoring the characteristics of
Gaussians existing in the map, which are optimized to represent the surrounding space
through the mapping process. On the other hand, when applying the proposed ellipse
regularization, the best tracking accuracy is achieved. This is attributed to the ability of

<!-- page 13 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
13
the proposed ellipse regularization to consider the characteristics of Gaussians existing
in the map while performing regularization.
Table 6: Ablation of Scale Aligning on Replica. The results are the average of 8 scenes in the
Replica dataset.
Covs from G-ICP Re-init ATE ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
✗
✗
8.893
24.81
0.840
0.380
✓
✗
0.258
33.21
0.922
0.177
✓
constant 0.158
37.33
0.964
0.074
✓
z
0.158
38.70
0.974
0.044
✓
z1.5
0.157
38.83
0.975
0.041
Scale Aligning We implement scale aligning to reduce the difference between scales
of existing Gaussians in the map and newly added Gaussians. By doing this, we ensure
that scales of newly added Gaussians closely resemble the optimal value they will reach
through optimization. To demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach, we tested our
method in various cases and Tab. 6 shows the results. When not utilizing the covari-
ances computed during the G-ICP [33] process, we calculate the scales of Gaussians
by using simple-knn module of vanilla 3DGS [15], and set rotations as identity. In this
case, a significant drop in tracking performance appeared. This is because the newly
added Gaussians lack sufficient prior information about the 3D structure, causing them
to be utilized as target Gaussians without being optimally optimized in space. On the
other hand, in the case of using the computed covariance from the G-ICP process, the
tracking and mapping performance improves. Furthermore, the best performance is ob-
served when dividing the scale by z1.5. These results indicate that utilizing covariances
calculated during G-ICP procedure is effective for both tracking and mapping, and scale
aligning facilitates smooth connection from G-ICP to 3DGS.
Table 7: Keyframe and Mapping-Only Keyframe Selection Ablation on Replica. Reported
results are the average of 8 scenes in the Replica dataset.
Keyframe
Mapping-Only Keyframe ATE [cm] ↓PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓
tracking + every 30 frame
-
0.174
37.52
0.968
0.055
tracking + every 10 frame
-
0.176
38.83
0.974
0.041
tracking
every 10 frame
0.157
38.83
0.975
0.041
Additional Keyframe Selection for Mapping For mapping quality, sufficient keyframes
are required, but indiscriminate addition of keyframes causes a drop in tracking ac-
curacy. To address this challenge and maximize both tracking accuracy and mapping
quality, we pick mapping-only keyframes in addition to the original keyframes. Tab. 7
presents the result of the ablation study of this method. When using only keyframes
without mapping-only keyframes, camera tracking accuracy suffers due to accumu-
lated errors in scan-matching. However, employing our proposed method yields the
best tracking accuracy and mapping quality. This result shows that our method selec-

<!-- page 14 -->
14
Seongbo Ha et al.
tively adds keyframes essential for tracking, thereby minimizing accumulated errors
in scan-matching. While leveraging these benefits, we ensure sufficient primitives and
RGBD images for training, which are crucial for enhancing map quality through the
use of mapping-only keyframes.
Table 8: Ablation of Methods for Avoiding Local Minima While Mapping on Replica. The
results are the average of 8 scenes in the Replica dataset.
(a)
Keyframe choice for learning PSNR SSIM LPIPS
recent 1 keyframe
26.85 0.872 0.200
covisible keyframes
31.34 0.924 0.120
random keyframes
38.83 0.975 0.041
(b)
densifying pruning ATE [cm] PSNR SSIM LPIPS
✓
✓
0.188
38.65 0.973 0.041
✓
✗
0.170
37.90 0.971 0.052
✗
✓
0.157
38.83 0.975 0.041
✗
✗
0.159
38.72 0.974 0.041
Avoiding Local Minima while Mapping We employ two methods to prevent Gaus-
sians from overfitting to the training image, which results in elongation to the viewpoint
direction: (1) training with randomly selected keyframes and (2) Gaussian prunning.
Tab. 8 presents the results of the ablation study on these methods.
In Tab. 8, the worst rendering performance is observed when repeatedly training
with the most recently added keyframe, while using covisible keyframes for training
yields better results. Covisible keyframes offer more diverse viewpoints for the Gaus-
sians compared to a single keyframe, yet they still provide limited diversity in view-
points. Therefore, utilizing them for training may still result in reduced map quality.
Random keyframes provide the most diverse viewpoints compared to other methods,
leading to a significant improvement in map quality.
In the vanilla 3DGS [15], Gaussian densifying/pruning techniques are utilized to
manage Gaussians. Tab. 8 shows the results of an ablation test of Gaussian densi-
fying/pruning in our method. Since our method appropriately supplies Gaussians for
spatial representation, densifying is unnecessary. However, pruning improves tracking
accuracy and map quality by removing Gaussians that have become elongated due to
overfitting or are no longer essential for representing the map.
5
Conclusion
In this paper, we have proposed RGBD GS-ICP-SLAM, a dense representation SLAM
system that leverages 3D Gaussian representation for high-fidelity spatial representa-
tion. We demonstrate that a fusion of G-ICP and 3DGS that utilizes a single 3D Gaus-
sian map for both tracking and mapping yields mutual benefits. The exchange of Gaus-
sians between tracking and mapping processes with scale alignments minimizes redun-
dant computations and constructs an efficient system. Moreover, our dynamic keyframe
selection method enhances both tracking and mapping performance. Through extensive
experiments, the proposed approach presents state-of-the-art performance in spatial rep-
resentation, camera pose estimation, and total system speed.

<!-- page 15 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
15
Limitations. The proposed method achieved fast system speed by relying solely on
depth for the 3D structure. However, in real-world environments, there are limitations
in the quality of reconstructed maps due to the inherent depth noise in RGB-D sensors.
Since the system speed is already exceptionally fast, it is expected that robust perfor-
mance can be achieved in noisy real-world environments by trading off a bit of speed
to compensate for noisy depth images with relatively robust RGB information.
References
1. Besl, P.J., McKay, N.D.: Method for registration of 3-d shapes. In: Sensor fusion IV: control
paradigms and data structures. vol. 1611, pp. 586–606. Spie (1992) 3
2. Biber, P., Straßer, W.: The normal distributions transform: A new approach to laser scan
matching. In: Proceedings 2003 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS 2003)(Cat. No. 03CH37453). vol. 3, pp. 2743–2748. IEEE (2003) 3
3. Bylow, E., Sturm, J., Kerl, C., Kahl, F., Cremers, D.: Real-time camera tracking and 3d
reconstruction using signed distance functions. In: Robotics: Science and Systems. vol. 2,
p. 2 (2013) 1, 4
4. Campos, C., Elvira, R., Rodríguez, J.J.G., Montiel, J.M., Tardós, J.D.: Orb-slam3: An accu-
rate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics 37(6), 1874–1890 (2021) 2, 4, 9, 10
5. Canelhas, D.R., Stoyanov, T., Lilienthal, A.J.: Sdf tracker: A parallel algorithm for on-line
pose estimation and scene reconstruction from depth images. In: 2013 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. pp. 3671–3676. IEEE (2013) 1, 4
6. Ceriani, S., Sánchez, C., Taddei, P., Wolfart, E., Sequeira, V.: Pose interpolation slam for
large maps using moving 3d sensors. In: 2015 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelli-
gent robots and systems (IROS). pp. 750–757. IEEE (2015) 3
7. Chetverikov, D., Svirko, D., Stepanov, D., Krsek, P.: The trimmed iterative closest point
algorithm. In: 2002 International Conference on Pattern Recognition. vol. 3, pp. 545–548.
IEEE (2002) 3
8. Chung, C.M., Tseng, Y.C., Hsu, Y.C., Shi, X.Q., Hua, Y.H., Yeh, J.F., Chen, W.C., Chen,
Y.T., Hsu, W.H.: Orbeez-slam: A real-time monocular visual slam with orb features and
nerf-realized mapping. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). pp. 9400–9406. IEEE (2023) 1, 2, 3, 4, 10, 11
9. Czarnowski, J., Laidlow, T., Clark, R., Davison, A.J.: Deepfactors: Real-time probabilistic
dense monocular slam. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 5(2), 721–728 (2020) 3
10. Dai, A., Nießner, M., Zollhöfer, M., Izadi, S., Theobalt, C.: Bundlefusion: Real-time globally
consistent 3d reconstruction using on-the-fly surface reintegration. ACM Transactions on
Graphics (ToG) 36(4), 1 (2017) 1, 4
11. Grisetti, G., Kümmerle, R., Stachniss, C., Burgard, W.: A tutorial on graph-based slam. IEEE
Intelligent Transportation Systems Magazine 2(4), 31–43 (2010) 3
12. Huang, H., Li, L., Cheng, H., Yeung, S.K.: Photo-slam: Real-time simultaneous localiza-
tion and photorealistic mapping for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.16728 (2023) 2, 3, 4, 9, 10, 11
13. Johari, M.M., Carta, C., Fleuret, F.: Eslam: Efficient dense slam system based on hybrid
representation of signed distance fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 17408–17419 (2023) 4
14. Keetha, N., Karhade, J., Jatavallabhula, K.M., Yang, G., Scherer, S., Ramanan, D., Luiten,
J.: Splatam: Splat, track & map 3d gaussians for dense rgb-d slam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.02126 (2023) 2, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12

<!-- page 16 -->
16
Seongbo Ha et al.
15. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics 42(4) (2023) 2, 13, 14
16. Kerl, C., Sturm, J., Cremers, D.: Dense visual slam for rgb-d cameras. In: 2013 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. pp. 2100–2106. IEEE (2013) 3
17. Koide, K., Yokozuka, M., Oishi, S., Banno, A.: Voxelized gicp for fast and accurate 3d point
cloud registration. In: 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). pp. 11054–11059. IEEE (2021) 2
18. Kong, X., Liu, S., Taher, M., Davison, A.J.: vmap: Vectorised object mapping for neural
field slam. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 952–961 (2023) 1, 2, 3, 4
19. Lin, J., Zhang, F.: Loam livox: A fast, robust, high-precision lidar odometry and mapping
package for lidars of small fov. In: 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA). pp. 3126–3131. IEEE (2020) 3
20. Low, K.L.: Linear least-squares optimization for point-to-plane icp surface registration.
Chapel Hill, University of North Carolina 4(10), 1–3 (2004) 3
21. Mallios, A., Ridao, P., Ribas, D., Hernández, E.: Scan matching slam in underwater environ-
ments. Autonomous Robots 36, 181–198 (2014) 3
22. Matsuki, H., Murai, R., Kelly, P.H., Davison, A.J.: Gaussian splatting slam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.06741 (2023) 2, 4, 9
23. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Communications of the
ACM 65(1), 99–106 (2021) 1, 4
24. Müller, T., Evans, A., Schied, C., Keller, A.: Instant neural graphics primitives with a mul-
tiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 41(4), 1–15 (2022) 4
25. Mur-Artal, R., Montiel, J.M.M., Tardos, J.D.: Orb-slam: a versatile and accurate monocular
slam system. IEEE transactions on robotics 31(5), 1147–1163 (2015) 7
26. Mur-Artal, R., Tardós, J.D.: Orb-slam2: An open-source slam system for monocular, stereo,
and rgb-d cameras. IEEE transactions on robotics 33(5), 1255–1262 (2017) 2, 4, 10
27. Newcombe, R.A., Izadi, S., Hilliges, O., Molyneaux, D., Kim, D., Davison, A.J., Kohi, P.,
Shotton, J., Hodges, S., Fitzgibbon, A.: Kinectfusion: Real-time dense surface mapping and
tracking. In: 2011 10th IEEE international symposium on mixed and augmented reality. pp.
127–136. Ieee (2011) 1, 4
28. Nieto, J., Bailey, T., Nebot, E.: Recursive scan-matching slam. Robotics and Autonomous
systems 55(1), 39–49 (2007) 3
29. Palieri, M., Morrell, B., Thakur, A., Ebadi, K., Nash, J., Chatterjee, A., Kanellakis, C., Car-
lone, L., Guaragnella, C., Agha-Mohammadi, A.a.: Locus: A multi-sensor lidar-centric solu-
tion for high-precision odometry and 3d mapping in real-time. IEEE Robotics and Automa-
tion Letters 6(2), 421–428 (2020) 3
30. Prisacariu, V.A., Kähler, O., Golodetz, S., Sapienza, M., Cavallari, T., Torr, P.H., Murray,
D.W.: Infinitam v3: A framework for large-scale 3d reconstruction with loop closure. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1708.00783 (2017) 1, 4
31. Qin, T., Li, P., Shen, S.: Vins-mono: A robust and versatile monocular visual-inertial state
estimator. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 34(4), 1004–1020 (2018) 7
32. Sandström, E., Li, Y., Van Gool, L., Oswald, M.R.: Point-slam: Dense neural point cloud-
based slam. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision.
pp. 18433–18444 (2023) 1, 2, 4, 9, 10, 11, 12
33. Segal, A., Haehnel, D., Thrun, S.: Generalized-icp. In: Robotics: science and systems. vol. 2,
p. 435. Seattle, WA (2009) 2, 3, 6, 9, 13
34. Serafin, J., Grisetti, G.: Nicp: Dense normal based point cloud registration. In: 2015
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). pp. 742–749.
IEEE (2015) 3

<!-- page 17 -->
RGBD GS-ICP SLAM
17
35. Shan, T., Englot, B.: Lego-loam: Lightweight and ground-optimized lidar odometry and
mapping on variable terrain. In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS). pp. 4758–4765. IEEE (2018) 3
36. Shan, T., Englot, B., Meyers, D., Wang, W., Ratti, C., Rus, D.: Lio-sam: Tightly-coupled lidar
inertial odometry via smoothing and mapping. In: 2020 IEEE/RSJ international conference
on intelligent robots and systems (IROS). pp. 5135–5142. IEEE (2020) 3
37. Straub, J., Whelan, T., Ma, L., Chen, Y., Wijmans, E., Green, S., Engel, J.J., Mur-Artal,
R., Ren, C., Verma, S., et al.: The replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.05797 (2019) 7, 9
38. Sturm, J., Engelhard, N., Endres, F., Burgard, W., Cremers, D.: A benchmark for the evalua-
tion of rgb-d slam systems. In: 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots
and systems. pp. 573–580. IEEE (2012) 9
39. Sucar, E., Liu, S., Ortiz, J., Davison, A.J.: imap: Implicit mapping and positioning in real-
time. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp.
6229–6238 (2021) 1, 2, 4
40. Taud, H., Mas, J.: Multilayer perceptron (mlp). Geomatic approaches for modeling land
change scenarios pp. 451–455 (2018) 4
41. Vizzo, I., Guadagnino, T., Mersch, B., Wiesmann, L., Behley, J., Stachniss, C.: Kiss-icp: In
defense of point-to-point icp–simple, accurate, and robust registration if done the right way.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 8(2), 1029–1036 (2023) 3
42. Whelan, T., Johannsson, H., Kaess, M., Leonard, J.J., McDonald, J.: Robust real-time visual
odometry for dense rgb-d mapping. In: 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation. pp. 5724–5731. IEEE (2013) 1, 4
43. Wu, G., Yi, T., Fang, J., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Wei, W., Liu, W., Tian, Q., Wang, X.: 4d gaussian
splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.08528 (2023) 2
44. Yan, C., Qu, D., Wang, D., Xu, D., Wang, Z., Zhao, B., Li, X.: Gs-slam: Dense visual slam
with 3d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11700 (2023) 2, 4, 9, 10, 11
45. Yang, X., Li, H., Zhai, H., Ming, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, G.: Vox-fusion: Dense tracking and
mapping with voxel-based neural implicit representation. In: 2022 IEEE International Sym-
posium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR). pp. 499–507. IEEE (2022) 1
46. Zhang, J., Singh, S.: Loam: Lidar odometry and mapping in real-time. In: Robotics: Science
and systems. vol. 2, pp. 1–9. Berkeley, CA (2014) 3
47. Zhu, Z., Peng, S., Larsson, V., Xu, W., Bao, H., Cui, Z., Oswald, M.R., Pollefeys, M.: Nice-
slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 12786–12796 (2022) 1, 2, 4, 9, 10,
11
