<!-- page 1 -->
HGS-Mapping: Online Dense Mapping Using
Hybrid Gaussian Representation in Urban Scenes
Ke Wu1, Kaizhao Zhang2, Zhiwei Zhang1, Shanshuai Yuan1, Muer Tie1, Julong
Wei1, Zijun Xu1, Jieru Zhao3, Zhongxue Gan1, Wenchao Ding1
1 Fudan University 23110860017@m.fudan.edu.com
2 School of Future Technology, Harbin Institute of Technology
3 Department of Computer Science and Engineering, Shanghai Jiao Tong University
Abstract. Online dense mapping of urban scenes forms a fundamental
cornerstone for scene understanding and navigation of autonomous ve-
hicles. Recent advancements in mapping methods are mainly based on
NeRF, whose rendering speed is too slow to meet online requirements. 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), with its rendering speed hundreds of times
faster than NeRF, holds greater potential in online dense mapping. How-
ever, integrating 3DGS into a street-view dense mapping framework still
faces two challenges, including incomplete reconstruction due to the ab-
sence of geometric information beyond the LiDAR coverage area and
extensive computation for reconstruction in large urban scenes. To this
end, we propose HGS-Mapping, an online dense mapping framework
in unbounded large-scale scenes. To attain complete construction, our
framework introduces Hybrid Gaussian Representation, which models
different parts of the entire scene using Gaussians with distinct proper-
ties. Furthermore, we employ a hybrid Gaussian initialization mechanism
and an adaptive update method to achieve high-fidelity and rapid recon-
struction. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to integrate
Gaussian representation into online dense mapping of urban scenes. Our
approach achieves SOTA reconstruction accuracy while only employing
66% number of Gaussians, leading to 20% faster reconstruction speed.
Keywords: Gaussian Splatting · Dense Mapping · Autonomous Driving
1
Introduction
Online dense mapping is crucial for autonomous vehicles to understand complex
environments and navigate effectively. The meaning of online dense mapping lies
in continuously creating a detailed map of the vehicle’s surroundings using sensor
data streams (camera and LiDAR, etc.) as the vehicle moves. This detailed map
encompasses almost all visible surfaces and objects, offering a comprehensive
and high-fidelity representation of the environment.
How to represent this dense map has been studied for decades. Conventional
methods [16, 24, 27, 35] directly fuse sensor data across space and time to con-
struct a map, but this kind of map is sparse, unable to capture rich scene details,
arXiv:2403.20159v1  [cs.CV]  29 Mar 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
2
F. Author et al.
Ours
SplaTAM
Ours
SplaTAM
Number of Gaussians
Number of Gaussians
Scale of Gaussians
Frame ID
Scale of Gaussians
Frame ID
PSNR=23.3451
PSNR=22.5342
PSNR=17.0415
PSNR=16.6812
Number of Gaussians
Number of Gaussians
3,699,140
5,578,271
Fig. 1: Reconstruction of large scale urban scenes. Our method achieves high-
quality rendering results using only two-thirds the number of Gaussians compared to
the current SOTA online reconstruction method SplaTAM [14].
and contains holes. In recent years, NeRF-based methods have gained popular-
ity due to their realistic novel view synthesis. NeRF [22] uses resource-intensive
neural networks to represent the color and density of the scene and outputs
the entire image in a volume rendering manner, which leads to several training
hours. Subsequent methods [23,34,46] accelerate training and rendering speed by
combing voxel features with light MLPs, introducing NeRF into online mapping.
However, these methods are limited by the finite resolution of voxels, making
it difficult to balance rendering quality and speed. Moreover, the inherent vol-
ume rendering process of NeRF requires sampling all the pixels, which is the
fundamental reason for deficient training and rendering speed.
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [15] has received much attention in recent
months due to its high-fidelity rendering quality and rendering speed that is
hundreds of times faster than NeRF, holding greater potential in online dense
mapping. 3DGS utilizes Gaussians with learnable parameters to represent the
entire scene, replacing NeRF’s volume rendering with splatting-based rasteriza-
tion [47]. Despite the impressive rendering quality and speed of 3DGS, research
on using 3DGS representation for online dense mapping is scarce and entirely
limited to indoor scenarios [14,21,37,42]. This limitation arises because 3DGS re-
quires pre-processing feature point clouds with Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [30]
on a complete dataset for initializing Gaussians, which is not feasible for on-
line dense mapping tasks. Existing methods in indoor scenarios typically use a
depth stream to initialize Gaussians. In complex outdoor environments, depth
cameras often struggle to function effectively, leading to challenges in obtaining
dense depth information for urban scenes. The straightforward approach is to
initialize Gaussians using LiDAR points. Nonetheless, introducing 3D Gaussian
representation into online dense mapping in urban scenes still faces the follow-
ing two gaps. Firstly, LiDAR points can only cover a limited range; for example,
the upper parts of trees and buildings, and distant landscapes may lack LiDAR
coverage. Consequently, this results in a lack of initial geometry information for
these areas, making it impossible for existing Gaussian-based methods to fully

<!-- page 3 -->
Abbreviated paper title
3
reconstruct the scene. Secondly, large urban scenes require a significant num-
ber of Gaussians, leading to substantial memory overhead and computational
complexity during the rasterization process.
To tackle these challenges outlined above, we present HGS-Mapping, an on-
line dense mapping framework that fully leverages the potential of Gaussian
representation, achieving accurate and efficient reconstruction for entire urban
environments at the same time. Our approach introduces a novel representa-
tion called Hybrid Gaussian Representation, comprised of Sphere Gaussian, 3D
Gaussian, and 2D Gaussian Plane components. This representation achieves
high-fidelity reconstruction results for the areas lacking LiDAR points. Thus,
the entire urban scene is fully represented in this manner. Furthermore, we im-
plement an adaptive update method for Gaussians, which dynamically densifies
Gaussians based on the reconstruction loss and prunes the Gaussians of low im-
portance. This update method enhances rendering quality and accelerates ren-
dering speed. As shown in Fig. 1, we utilize merely 66% of the number of Gaus-
sians in SplaTAM [14] and optimize Gaussians to an appropriately non-minimal
scale. With fewer Gaussians, we successfully convey richer scene information and
render images of higher quality. To the best of our knowledge, we are the first to
integrate Gaussian representation into online dense mapping for urban scenes.
Our contributions can be summarized as follows:
– We are the first to introduce Gaussian representation to online dense map-
ping in urban scenes, and we innovatively propose a Hybrid Gaussian Rep-
resentation, which facilitates reconstructing entire urban scenes.
– We propose a hybrid Gaussian initialization mechanism and an adaptive
update method, which result in superior rendering quality and faster recon-
struction speeds.
– Comprehensive experiments demonstrate that HGS-Mapping surpasses pre-
vious methods in both rendering quality and speed while employing only
two-thirds the number of Gaussians compared to the SOTA approach.
2
Related Works
3D Gaussian Splatting. 3DGS [15] employs 3D Gaussians to represent scenes
and achieves fast differentiable rendering through splat-based rasterization. Nu-
merous downstream tasks have emerged, such as driving scenes simulation [38,
45], simultaneous localization and mapping [14, 21, 37, 42], mesh reconstruc-
tion [4,10], and dynamic scene modeling [20,36,41], etc. To reduce storage capac-
ity, LightGaussian [8] computes the global significance of Gaussians and prunes
away those below a certain threshold. Gaussianpro [6] introduces a progressive
propagation strategy to guide Gaussian densification and tests on the Waymo
dataset [32]. However, current online mapping methods built on 3D Gaussians
predominantly target indoor scene reconstruction, overlooking mechanisms suit-
able for outdoor environments. Additionally, most efforts in reconstructing scenes
for autonomous driving rely on SfM [30] for Gaussian initialization, a process
which is too slow to satisfy the real-time demands of online dense mapping.

<!-- page 4 -->
4
F. Author et al.
Urban Scale Mapping. With the success of NeRF [22] in 3D reconstruction,
an increasing number of studies are focusing on reconstruction and simulation for
autonomous driving in urban scenes [11,13,18,26,29,33,39,40]. However, due to
the vastness, unbounded nature, and difficult accessibility of depth information
in urban environments, urban scale mapping presents significant challenges. For
example, to address the sky regions in urban scenes where rays never intersect
with any opaque surfaces, [11,29] propose an MLP to map the ray direction to the
color of the sky. For dynamic objects within the urban scene, Unisim [40] adopts
the NSG [25] approach of representing dynamic scenes as scene graphs for editing
purposes. Streetsurf [11] employs the signed distance function (SDF) to portray
urban scenes and draws inspiration from the methodology of NeRF++ [43] to
decompose unbounded space using a hyper-cuboid model.
[38, 45] firstly em-
ploy 3D Gaussian splatting for the reconstruction of urban scenes. Specifically,
DrivingGaussian [45] utilizes a dynamic Gaussian graph to describe the scene
dynamically and incorporates LiDAR priors for an incremental sequential back-
ground representation. StreetGaussian [38] employs a 4D spherical harmonics
model to characterize dynamic objects and uses semantic logits for rendering
semantic images. However, there hasn’t been any work yet applying advanced
Gaussian representation to online mapping in urban environments.
3
Method
The overview of our pipeline is illustrated in Fig. 2. The input of our system
includes RGB-SparseD (LiDAR) stream {It, Lt} along with a pose sequence Tt
from a moving vehicle in urban streets. To initialize Gaussians, we match the
feature points from adjacent RGB frames with the corresponding LiDAR points.
Based on the Hybrid Gaussian Representation (Sec. 3.1), we model the world as
inliers, outliers, and the sky separately. We design an efficient rasterizer tailored
for such representation (Sec. 3.2). Following this, we use an adaptive update
method (Sec. 3.3) to incrementally maintain and optimize our Hybrid Gaussian
Representation. Our framework supports rendering high-quality RGB and depth
images and exporting meshes using marching cubes.
3.1
Hybrid Gaussian Representation
It is instinctive for human to divide the world into the sky, the ground, and
ground objects due to their significant differences in geometry and photometry.
Consequently, using the same representation to model these different parts is in-
efficient. We propose Hybrid Gaussian Representation consisting of three types
of Gaussians: Gsky, Ginlier and Goutlier, which are used to model different parts
of the urban scenario, namely the sky, the road surface, and roadside scenery re-
spectively. Our Hybrid Gaussian Representation records the color and geometric
information of the scene. The initialization method and the properties for each
type of Gaussians are distinct.

<!-- page 5 -->
Abbreviated paper title
5
2D Gaussian Plane ()
3D Gaussian (	)
Hybrid Gaussian Representation
Hybrid RGBD Rasterizer
Marching Cubes
Output RGBD
Output Triangle Mesh
Sphere Gaussian (
)
Input RGB Stream
Input LiDAR Stream
Feature Points Matching
Silhouette Filter
Clone
Split
Prune
ℒ + ℒ + ℒ
Densify Control
Importance Pruning
Score
Prune Low k%
Add New Gaussian
Filter Out
Plane Segmentation
world coord
vehicle coord
 coord
Adaptive Update Method
Fig. 2: Overview of HGS-Mapping’s pipeline. Input RGB-LiDAR stream and
pose sequence are incrementally integrated into our Hybrid Gaussian Representation.
We update and adjust the Gaussians with our Adaptive Update Method (Densify
Control, Importance Pruning, Silhouette Filter). Our method supports rendering RGB-
Depth using Hybrid Gaussian Rasterizer and exporting meshes.
Gaussian Initialization. Vanilla 3DGS initializes Gaussians with a sparse
point cloud obtained by running Structure-from-Motion (SfM) on the complete
dataset. However, this is infeasible for online mapping processes in which the
vehicle is mapping while moving, and the very sparse viewpoints can also lead
to incorrect geometric structures generated by SfM.
To achieve better initialization, we use LiDAR points to initialize Gaussians.
However, LiDAR’s coverage is quite limited, unable to capture the upper parts
of trees and buildings, as well as distant landscapes.
To this end, for areas within the LiDAR’s coverage, we initialize Gaussians
using LiDAR points. For the remaining areas, we implement a lightweight feature
matching network [17] to extract matching pixels from adjacent RGB frames
and calculate optical flow value {f}. These feature pixels’ spatial positions are
then determined through epipolar geometry calculations Epip(·). In the actual
computation process, we found that using epipolar geometry to determine depths
of distance points (very low optical flow value) is highly unreliable because the
two rays are nearly parallel, resulting in a calculated infinity depth. To address
this, for pixels with optical flow values less than fth, we estimate the depth of
distant feature points through an approximate calculation method. In summary,
pixel u’s depth du calculation is shown in Eq. (1). θu represents the angle between
the ray of u and the camera’s optical axis. The derivation process of Eq. (1) can
be found in the supplementary material.  \label {depth_cal} d_u = \left \{\begin {matrix} \mathrm {Epip}(T_t, T_{t+1},f_u) & f_u \ge f_{th} \\ d_{th} \cdot \frac {tan\theta _u / f_{u}}{tan\theta _{th}/f_{th}} & f_u < f_{th} \end {matrix}\right .

<!-- page 6 -->
6
F. Author et al.
du =
(
Epip(Tt, Tt+1, fu) fu ≥fth
dth ·
tanθu/fu
tanθth/fth
fu < fth
(1)
Following the calculations above, we obtained the initial positions of Gaus-
sians {Pt} that cover LiDAR’s blind spots (such as the upper parts of trees/buildings
and distant landscapes). For the other properties of Gaussians, we initialize them
using the method described in SplaTAM [14].
Sphere Gaussian. Vanilla 3DGS often generates ambiguous floaters to ren-
der the sky, leading to a significant number of unnecessary Gaussians and non-
conformance to multi-view consistency. This phenomenon indicates that the sky
lacks geometric information and cannot be represented by Gaussians in the world
coordinate system and there are no Gaussian-based methods to address the issue
of sky reconstruction.
We discover that the color of the sky depends on the viewing direction and is
unrelated to the vehicle’s translation. Therefore, we model the sky using Gaus-
sians attached to the surface of an enormous sphere S with a radius of R, namely
Sphere Gaussians Gsky. At any given moment, there exists only a rotational
transformation between the coordinate system of Gsky and that of the vehicle.
The position property of Gsky has only two degrees of freedom. Furthermore, we
stipulate that the rotation property of Gsky is parallel to the radial direction of
the spherical surface S, and Gsky has a fixed thickness along the radial direction.
As a result, Gsky possesses only the following eight learnable properties
{[xsky, zsky], [ssky
x
, ssky
z
], csky, αsky}, where csky represents [rsky, gsky, bsky]. For
the remaining non-learnable properties, we calculate ysky and qsky using Eq. (2).
  \b e
g
in  {aligne d } \label  { sphere_gaus
s i
an} y ^{sky}
 &=  \sqr
t {R^2
-  (x^{s
ky})^2
 -  (y^{
sky})^
2 } , \theta = arccos(\frac {y^{sky}}{R})\\ q^{sky} &= [cos(\frac { \theta }{2}), sin(\frac {\theta }{2})\frac {x^{sky}}{R}, sin(\frac {\theta }{2})\frac {y^{sky}}{R}, sin(\frac {\theta }{2})\frac {z^{sky}}{R}] \end {aligned} 
(2)
When a new RGB frame It arrives, we transform the ray direction vectors
of It’s sky pixels from the vehicle’s coordinate system to the Gsky’s coordinate
system, and add new Gaussians to Gsky at the intersection position of the ray
direction and the spherical surface S. During the rendering process, we first
convert Sphere Gaussians from Gsky’s coordinate to the vehicle’s coordinate,
and then utilize Tt to transform these Gaussians to the world coordinate system.
Subsequently, we feed them to our Hybrid RGBD Rasterizer (Sec. 3.2). This
approach ensures that the Sphere Gaussians are consistent across multiple views.
2D Gaussian Plane. We found that in Vanilla 3DGS, Gaussians on the road
surface tend to stack in multiple layers with significant overlap between each
other. However, both the geometry and texture of the road surface are relatively
simple, leading to a substantial redundancy of the Gaussians. Meanwhile, Vanilla

<!-- page 7 -->
Abbreviated paper title
7
3DGS sorts Gaussians of the road surface and those of roadside landscapes to-
gether. And it’s worth emphasizing that Gaussian sorting consumes up to 30% of
the total rendering process [28]. Since the road surface is always below all road-
side landscapes, the Gaussians of the road surface can be completely excluded
from the sorting calculation, which has great potential to accelerate rendering.
Therefore, we model the road using flattened Gaussians on the plane, i.e. 2D
Gaussian Plane Ginlier. The position property of Ginlier only has two degrees
of freedom due to being confined to a plane. We define Ginlier’s rotation vector
qinlier is parallel to the plane’s normal vector and Ginlier has a fixed thickness
sinlier
y
along qinlier. Thus, Ginlier possesses the following eight learnable prop-
erties: {[xinlier, zinlier], [sinlier
x
, sinlier
z
], cinlier, αinlier}. For the remaining non-
learnable properties of Ginlier, we calculate yinlier and qinlier using Eq. (3).
  \begi n  {a l ig n e
d
}  \ label {
p
l
an e _g a us s
ian} y^ { inlier
} & = \fr
ac {-Ax- C
z - D}{B}
, \theta = arc
cos(\frac
 {B}{\sqrt {A^2+B^2+C^2}}) \\ q^{inlier} &= [cos(\frac {\theta }{2}), sin(\frac {\theta }{2})cos(\theta )\frac {A}{B}, sin(\frac {\theta }{2})cos(\theta ), sin(\frac {\theta }{2})cos(\theta )\frac {C}{B}] \end {aligned} 
(3)
Initially, we get the first RGB-LiDAR frame {I0, L0}. We calculate the fea-
ture points P0 of I0 using Eq. (1) and get ˆ
L0 by concatenating P0 and L0, i.e.
ˆ
L0 = concat(L0, P0) . Then, we implement the plane segmentation algorithm
(RANSAC [44]) to divide ˆ
L0 into inlier ˆ
Lo
inlier and outlier ˆ
Lo
outlier, and obtain
the plane equation Ax + By + Cz + D = 0. When a subsequent RGB-LiDAR
frame {It, Lt} arrives, we use the aforementioned method to obtain ˆLt and cal-
culate their distances to the plane mentioned above. We set a distance threshold
Dth and classify the part of ˆLt as ˆLt
inlier, whose distances to the plane are less
than Dth. Then we add ˆLt
inlier to Ginlier. Specifically, for complex urban scenes,
we select some keyframes and construct plane equations between each pair of
adjacent keyframes, achieving the reconstruction of undulating road surfaces.
Our approach reduces the number of Gaussians on the road and improves
the rendering speed. Additionally, by distinguishing between inliers and outliers,
Gaussians on the road are no longer involved in the sorting algorithm, which
will be elaborated in Sec. 3.2.
3D Gaussian. We use 3D Gaussian Goutlier to model roadside landscapes. The
geometric and texture of roadside landscapes are intricate. Resembling from
Vanilla 3DGS, we utilize ellipsoids-shaped Gaussians to characterize Goutlier,
which ensures that the Gaussians have sufficient degrees of freedom. Goutlier pos-
sesses 14 learnable properties {µoutlier, soutlier, coutlier, qoutlier, αoutlier}, where
position µ means [x, y, z] and scale s means [sx, sy, sz].
3.2
Rasterization and Optimization
Hybrid RGBD Rasterizer. We design a Hybrid RGBD Rasterizer tailored
for Hybrid Gaussian Representation. We calculate the weight f(p) of any point
p ∈R3 in 3D space according to the standard Gaussian equation Eq. (4).

<!-- page 8 -->
8
F. Author et al.
f \b e gin {aligned} \l
abe l  {w ei g ht_equation} f(p) &= \textrm {sigmoid}(\alpha ) exp(-\frac {1}{2}(p-\mu )^T(p-\mu )) \end {aligned} 
(4)
where µ and α represent the center and the opacity of Gaussians, respectively.
Our Hybrid Gaussian Rasterization contains three steps. Firstly, we trans-
form Gsky to the world coordinate as described in Sec. 3.1. And for a pixel be-
longing to a tile, we independently evaluate the three types of Gaussians within
the tile. Then, we perform sorting within Gsky and Goutlier individually and con-
catenate them together. The order from front to back is Goutlier, Ginlier, Gsky.
Finally, we render one pixel’s RGB value C and depth value D by directly com-
puting the weighted sum of N sorted Gaussians overlapping with this pixel, as
described in Eq. (5).
  
\
b
egi
n {aligned} \label {weight_sum_cd} C = \sum _{i=1}^{N}c_if_i\prod _{j=1}^{i-1}(1-f_j) \\ D = \sum _{i=1}^{N}d_if_i\prod _{j=1}^{i-1}(1-f_j) \end {aligned} f
(5)
where c, d are the color and depth of each Gaussian and f is given by Eq. (4). Our
approach saved 20% of the time by sorting three types of Gaussians separately
compared to sorting them together.
Optimize on Keyframe List. To prevent degradation of the reconstruction
quality of historical frames during the online mapping process [31], we maintain
a global keyframe list in the same spirit of [46]. In each iteration, a frame is
randomly selected from the keyframe list for optimization. The keyframe list
consists of K frames. We choose K −2 frames randomly from all frames that
overlap with current frame based on point cloud projection, and add the current
and previous frame to the list. We update the keyframe list every n frames.
Then we provide details on the optimization of {Gsky, Ginlier, Goutlier}. Our
loss function L consists of three components: photometric loss LRGB, geometric
loss LLiDAR, and regularization loss Lreg.
The RGB loss LRGB consists of L1 and a D-SSIM term:
  \m a th c al { L }_{RGB} &= (1-\lambda )\mathcal {L}_1 + \lambda \mathcal {L}_{\textrm {D-SSIM}}
(6)
The LiDAR loss LLiDAR is the L1 loss between Sparse-D (LiDAR) and the
predicted depth. The regularization loss Lreg aims to improve the quality of
rendered depth, including depth smoothness loss Lsmooth and isotropic [21] loss
Liso:
  \begi n  {ali
g n ed} \lab e l {we
i g ht_sum} 
\mat h ca l  {L} _{ s moo
th}& = \left |\partia l  _{x} d_{t}^{*}\right | e^{-\left |\partial _{x} I_{t}\right |}+\left |\partial _{y} d_{t}^{*}\right | e^{-\left |\partial _{y} I_{t}\right |} \\ \mathcal {L}_{iso} &= (s-\bar {s})^T(s-\bar {s})\\ \mathcal {L}_{reg} &= \lambda _{smooth}\mathcal {L}_{smooth} + \lambda _{iso}\mathcal {L}_{iso} \end {aligned} 
(7)
We optimize Gaussians by minimizing the loss L:
  \
underset { \{ G_{sky},G_{inlier } ,G_{outlier}  \} }{\textrm {min}} \lambda _{RGB} \mathcal {L}_{RGB} + \lambda _{LiDAR} \mathcal {L}_{LiDAR} + \lambda _{reg} \mathcal {L}_{reg}
(8)

<!-- page 9 -->
Abbreviated paper title
9
w fearture points init
w/o fearture points init
(a) Effect of Gaussian Initialization.
w/o Silhouette Filter
w Silhouette Filter
Silhouette Image
(b) Effect of Silhouette Filter.
Fig. 3: Effect of Gaussian Initialization & Silhouette Filter. Fig. 3a shows that
Gaussian Initialization enhances the reconstruction quality in the upper parts of trees
and buildings. Fig. 3b shows that Silhouette Filter removes the abnormal depth of
building’s edges.
3.3
Adaptive Update of Gaussians
Silhouette Filter. We render a silhouette image S according to Eq. (9), which
can reflect the density of Gaussians at different positions on the image. The
silhouette image serves two purposes: adding new Gaussians in regions where
Gaussians are relatively sparse, and filtering depth to address the issue of irreg-
ular spreading of depth at object edges.
  
\
l
abe
l 
{si
l
hou
et t e_render} S = \sum _{i=1}^N f_i \prod _{j=1}^{i-1} (1-f_j)
(9)
When a new frame {It, Lt} arrives, we add it to our Hybrid Gaussian. How-
ever, our goal is to add new Gaussians only in regions where current Gaussians
are relatively sparse. Therefore, we compute the silhouette and only add Gaus-
sians where S < Sth or L1(D) > 50MDE.
Moreover, we expand the application of the silhouette by using it to filter
the depth map. When rendering the depth map, we observed the issue of depth
shrinkage towards the optical center of the camera, as shown in Fig. 3b. This
occurrence is attributed to Eq. (4), where Gaussians are relatively sparse at
object edges, and opacity decays with distance from the Gaussian center, leading
to the phenomenon of depth shrinkage at object edges.
Densify Control. Gaussian densification accomplishes the purpose of cloning
new Gaussians in regions lacking geometric features and splitting large Gaus-
sians into smaller Gaussians. This method refines the scene details by densifying
Gaussians with large gradients, resolving the under-reconstruction problem [15]
of Gaussians. Although it enhances the quality of reconstruction, it also leads
to an increase in the number of Gaussians. Therefore, for every 20 iterations,
we execute densification and prune Gaussians with α values lower than αth or
Gaussians with s larger than sth.

<!-- page 10 -->
10
F. Author et al.
Importance Pruning. Solely utilizing opacity and scale as criteria for pruning
Gaussians is inefficient. The reason is that it only ensures the majority of Gaus-
sians eventually meet the threshold ranges we set for opacity and scale properties,
but it does not guarantee the Gaussians within the threshold ranges can effec-
tively represent the entire scene. To this end, we compute the importance score
ISj of Gaussian Gj and periodically prune Gaussians whose importance score
lies in the bottom η%. We incorporate the gradient of Gaussians grad(·) into the
importance calculation. Gaussians with larger gradients indicate poorer recon-
struction at their respective positions, thus importance is positively correlated
with the gradient. We normalize the gradient term using the loss of the current
frame L. The calculation of the importance score is illustrated in Eq. (10).
  \ b
egi
n
 {a
ligne d} \ la b el  {Gaus
s
ia n _significan ce} IS_j &= \sum _{i=1}^{KHW} \mathbb {I}(G_j,r_i)\cdot \alpha _j \cdot \tau _j \cdot \frac {grad_j}{\mathcal {L}}\\ \tau _j &= \mathrm {max}(\mathrm {min}(V_j,0)),V_{\mathrm {max} 50}) \end {aligned} 
(10)
Where j and K represent the index of the Gaussian and the length of keyframe
list respectively. I indicates whether rays ri emitted from an image of size H ×W
intersect with Gaussian Gj. Besides, Vj means the volume of Gj and Vmax50
represents the 50% largest volume of all sorted Gaussians.
4
Experiments
Datasets & Metrics. To evaluate the reconstruction quality under different
lighting, weather, and road enviroments, we select three most commonly used
datasets for urban scenes (KITTI [9], nuScenes [3], Waymo [32]) as well as one
simulated dataset (VKITTI2 [2]). We use their RGB images, LiDAR points,
and pose data as inputs of our experiments and we select multiple challenging
scenarios. To quantitatively validate the effect of our method, we employ three
widely recognized photometric rendering quality metrics (PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS).
Compared Baselines. We compared our method with two NeRF-based meth-
ods (Mip-NeRF360 [1], Instant-NGP [23]) and two Gaussian-based methods
(3DGS [15], SplaTAM [14]). Among them, Mip-NeRF 360, InstantNGP, and
3DGS are recognized for their high-quality reconstruction results, but their train-
ing process is off-line and time-consuming. SplaTAM, currently at the forefront
of Gaussian-based methods, supports online training and achieves outstanding
reconstruction results indoors. To address the inability to represent the sky in
street scenes, we used Deeplabv3 [5] to mask the sky before calculating metrics.
Additionally, we utilize LiDAR points to initialize Gaussians, ensuring consistent
initial conditions.
4.1
Comparisons and Analysis
RGB Results. To validate the rendering RGB quality, we compare our method
with two SOTA NeRF-based methods and two cutting-edge Gaussian-based

<!-- page 11 -->
Abbreviated paper title
11
VKITTI2 
KITTI 
nuScenes 
Waymo 
 
 
 
 
Mip-NeRF 360 
 
 
 
InstantNGP 
 
 
 
3DGS 
 
 
SplaTAM 
 
 
 
Ours 
 
Fig. 4: Quantitative RGB results in diverse urban scenes. We compare HGS-
Mapping with three off-line reconstruction methods [1, 15, 23] and an online dense
mapping method [14]. The three offline methods are trained over 20K iterations but
online methods only train 100 iterations per-frame. The results shows that our work
achieves superior high-quality rendering while faster training speed.
methods. For Gaussian-based methods, 3DGS, SplaTAM, and Ours are all ini-
tialized based on sparse LiDAR points.
For offline methods, Mip-NeRF 360 is trained for several hours on the entire
dataset, while InstantNGP is trained for 15 minutes (35K iterations), and 3DGS
is trained for 10 minutes (20K iterations). For online methods (SplaTAM, Ours),
we train 100 iterations per frame. All results are reported on a single RTX3090.
Tab. 1 shows that even when compared with offline methods, our render-
ing quality is significantly better. In urban scenes, our method outperforms
SplaTAM by a large margin in terms of rendering quality. Fig. 4 illustrates
SplaTAM’s lack of geometric reconstruction ability in areas without initialized
LiDAR points (upper part of trees/buildings and sky).
The rendering quality of SplaTAM in LiDAR coverage areas is also unsat-
isfactory. Although SplaTAM performs well in indoor scenes with dense depth
using a large number of small-sized spheres, its ability to fill in unreconstructed
areas with sparse LiDAR points initialization outdoors is inferior to that of el-
lipsoids. This will be further elaborated in the supplementary material.
Depth Results. We compare the depth images of 3DGS, SplaTAM, and ours.
Following the settings in the previous section, we render the depth and projected

<!-- page 12 -->
12
F. Author et al.
Table 1: Quantitative results of RGB rendering on four urban datasets [2,3,9,32].
VKITTI2
KITTI
nuScenes
Waymo
PSNR↑SSIM↑PSNR↑SSIM↑PSNR↑SSIM↑PSNR↑SSIM↑
Mip NeRF 360
24.878 0.7502 21.395 0.6499 28.530 0.8751 24.826 0.8440
Instant-NGP
21.586 0.6305 22.530 0.7418 27.046 0.8352 26.154 0.8557
3DGS(LIDAR)
24.236 0.7928 19.227 0.6185 28.091 0.9133 17.664 0.8491
Splatam(masked) 20.003 0.7401 14.778 0.4783 18.998 0.7459 20.371 0.7704
Ours
29.114 0.9019 22.520 0.8007 30.862 0.9404 26.445 0.8832
dense depth into point clouds for better visualization. Vanilla 3DGS lacks the
capability to render depth, we load 3DGS’s checkpoint into SplaTAM’s raster-
izer to enable depth rendering. Due to the absence of ground truth dense depth
in urban scenes, inspired by the depth completion task [12], we record the Mean
Absolute Error (MAE) and Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) between the pre-
dicted depth and sparse LiDAR data to assess the quality of depth map, that is
shown in Tab. 2. It is important to note that these two metrics can only evaluate
the quality of the depth within the LiDAR coverage. Fig. 5 demonstrates that
our method can render high-quality dense depth maps relying on LLiDAR and
Lsmooth. We are surprised to find that even for the very sparse LiDAR points in
nuScenes dataset (only
2975
1600×900 pixels have valid depth), our method can clearly
discern the geometric shapes of distant buildings and vehicles.
KITTI
Waymo
nuScenes
3DGS
SplaTAM
Ours
Input
Fig. 5: Qualitative depth results on KITTI [9], nuScenes [3] and Waymo [32].
Table 2: Sparse depth comparison using depth completion metrics [12].
KITTI
nuScenes
Waymo
MAE↓
RMSE↓
MAE↓
RMSE↓
MAE↓
RMSE↓
SplaTAM
0.503
0.973
0.079
1.563
0.353
1.819
Ours
0.203
0.522
0.033
0.309
0.101
0.673
Mesh Results. To provide a more intuitive comparison of the geometric re-
construction results across the entire scene, we qualitatively compare meshes of

<!-- page 13 -->
Abbreviated paper title
13
Ours and SplaTAM, as shown in Fig. 6. We employ voxel-fusion [7] and march-
ing cubes [19] to export the rendered dense depth map sequence as meshes.
We observe that due to the limited coverage of the LiDAR, SplaTAM render
very poor geometric shapes outside the LiDAR’s coverage. However, owing to
our feature point initialization, we can accurately reconstruct the upper parts
of trees/buildings. Furthermore, due to our separate representation of the road
surface and roadside objects, our road surface is smoother and devoid of holes.
KITTI
nuScenes
Waymo
SplaTAM
Ours
Fig. 6: Qualitative Mesh Comparisons on KITTI [9], nuScenes [3] and Waymo [32].
4.2
Ablation Studies
Hybrid Gaussian Representation. Our 3D Gaussian Goutlier’s properties
are the same as Vanilla 3DGS. Thus, we use Goutlier to simultaneously model
the sky, road surface, and roadside landscapes as a baseline. Subsequently, we
progressively substitute Gsky and Ginlier to model the sky and road surface,
respectively. To validate the effects of our Hybrid Gaussian Representation on
improving rendering quality and speed, we compare five metrics, including Ren-
dering FPS, SIZE, PSNR, etc., under the same KITTI scenario.
The second row of Tab. 3 indicates that modeling the sky using Gsky not only
reduces storage consumption but also enhances rendering speed. Furthermore,
we select scenes with complex sky colors from nuScenes and conducted ablation
experiments visualizing our Sphere Gaussian. Fig. 7 illustrates our Gsky render-
ing high-quality sky and clouds. The last row of Tab. 3 demonstrates that using
Ginlier results in a slight decrease in rendering quality (from 22.660 to 22.542)
but achieves remarkable improvements in storage efficiency (from 298.4MB to
245.4MB) and rendering speed (from 228FPS to 271 FPS).

<!-- page 14 -->
14
F. Author et al.
Table 3: Ablations on Hybrid Gaussian Representation.
Goutlier Gsky
Ginlier
FPS↑
SIZE↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
✓
✗
✗
209
318.9MB
21.246
0.6175
0.296
✓
✓
✗
228
298.4MB
22.660
0.7621
0.182
✓
✓
✓
271
245.4MB
22.542
0.7596
0.189
η %
SIZE↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
-
245.4MB
22.542
0.7596
0.189
1%
234.5MB
22.364
0.7215
0.204
3%
220.8MB
22.054
0.6955
0.230
5%
183.9MB
21.365
0.6479
0.275
Table 4: Ablation on Importance
Pruning with different pruning rate η%.
As η% increases, storage size significantly
declines, while there is a corresponding
drop in rendering quality.
GT
w/o 
w 
Fig. 7: Ablation on Gsky.
Importance Pruning. When the length of the keyframe list equals K, we begin
to record global significance every 5 iterations, and perform global significance
pruning on Goutlier every 2 frames, removing η% of the Goutlier each time.
We conduct experiments with different importance pruning rates η%, namely
turning it off and setting it to 1%, 3%, 5%, as shown in Tab. 4. Increasing the
pruning rate effectively reduces storage size, but setting it too high can lead to
a significant decrease in rendering quality.
Gaussian Initialization & Silhouette Filter. Regarding Feature Points Ini-
tialization in Sec. 3.1, we conduct tests in scenes with abundant trees and ex-
tensive visibility. The experimental results, as depicted in Fig. 3a, indicate that
our initialization method significantly enhances the reconstruction performance
in the upper parts of trees and buildings.
As for the Silhouette Filter in Sec. 3.3, Fig. 3b shows that the silhouette filter
effectively resolves the issue of object edge recession in the depth map.
5
Conclusion
We are the first 3DGS-based online dense mapping framework in urban scenes
by proposing the novel Hybrid Gaussian Representation suited for complex un-
bounded scenes. Additionally, extensive experiments demonstrate that our rep-
resentation and optimization methods significantly improve rendering speed and
quality, achieving SOTA performance. However, the efficacy of the RANSAC
method for extracting Ginlier becomes limited under conditions such as rugged
roads or significant curvature. Therefore, there remains potential for further en-
hancement of this framework to accommodate arbitrary outdoor scenes.

<!-- page 15 -->
Abbreviated paper title
15
References
1. Barron, J.T., Mildenhall, B., Verbin, D., Srinivasan, P.P., Hedman, P.: Mip-
nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 5470–
5479 (2022) 10, 11
2. Cabon, Y., Murray, N., Humenberger, M.: Virtual kitti 2 (2020) 10, 12
3. Caesar, H., Bankiti, V., Lang, A.H., Vora, S., Liong, V.E., Xu, Q., Krishnan, A.,
Pan, Y., Baldan, G., Beijbom, O.: nuscenes: A multimodal dataset for autonomous
driving. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. pp. 11621–11631 (2020) 10, 12, 13
4. Chen, H., Li, C., Lee, G.H.: Neusg: Neural implicit surface reconstruction with 3d
gaussian splatting guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00846 (2023) 3
5. Chen, L.C., Papandreou, G., Schroff, F., Adam, H.: Rethinking atrous convolution
for semantic image segmentation. arXiv preprint arXiv:1706.05587 (2017) 10
6. Cheng, K., Long, X., Yang, K., Yao, Y., Yin, W., Ma, Y., Wang, W., Chen, X.:
Gaussianpro: 3d gaussian splatting with progressive propagation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.14650 (2024) 3
7. Curless, B., Levoy, M.: A volumetric method for building complex models from
range images. In: Proceedings of the 23rd annual conference on Computer graphics
and interactive techniques. pp. 303–312 (1996) 13
8. Fan, Z., Wang, K., Wen, K., Zhu, Z., Xu, D., Wang, Z.: Lightgaussian: Un-
bounded 3d gaussian compression with 15x reduction and 200+ fps. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.17245 (2023) 3
9. Geiger, A., Lenz, P., Stiller, C., Urtasun, R.: Vision meets robotics: The kitti
dataset. The International Journal of Robotics Research 32(11), 1231–1237 (2013)
10, 12, 13
10. Guédon, A., Lepetit, V.: Sugar: Surface-aligned gaussian splatting for effi-
cient 3d mesh reconstruction and high-quality mesh rendering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.12775 (2023) 3
11. Guo, J., Deng, N., Li, X., Bai, Y., Shi, B., Wang, C., Ding, C., Wang, D., Li, Y.:
Streetsurf: Extending multi-view implicit surface reconstruction to street views.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.04988 (2023) 4
12. Hu, J., Bao, C., Ozay, M., Fan, C., Gao, Q., Liu, H., Lam, T.L.: Deep depth
completion from extremely sparse data: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence (2022) 12
13. Huang, S., Gojcic, Z., Wang, Z., Williams, F., Kasten, Y., Fidler, S., Schindler,
K., Litany, O.: Neural lidar fields for novel view synthesis. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2305.01643 (2023) 4
14. Keetha, N., Karhade, J., Jatavallabhula, K.M., Yang, G., Scherer, S., Ramanan,
D., Luiten, J.: Splatam: Splat, track & map 3d gaussians for dense rgb-d slam.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02126 (2023) 2, 3, 6, 10, 11
15. Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for
real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics 42(4) (2023) 2,
3, 9, 10, 11
16. Labbé, M., Michaud, F.: Rtab-map as an open-source lidar and visual simultaneous
localization and mapping library for large-scale and long-term online operation.
Journal of field robotics 36(2), 416–446 (2019) 1
17. Lindenberger, P., Sarlin, P.E., Pollefeys, M.: Lightglue: Local feature matching at
light speed. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.13643 (2023) 5

<!-- page 16 -->
16
F. Author et al.
18. Liu, J.Y., Chen, Y., Yang, Z., Wang, J., Manivasagam, S., Urtasun, R.: Real-time
neural rasterization for large scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 8416–8427 (2023) 4
19. Lorensen, W.E., Cline, H.E.: Marching cubes: A high resolution 3d surface con-
struction algorithm. In: Seminal graphics: pioneering efforts that shaped the field,
pp. 347–353 (1998) 13
20. Luiten, J., Kopanas, G., Leibe, B., Ramanan, D.: Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking
by persistent dynamic view synthesis. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.09713 (2023) 3
21. Matsuki, H., Murai, R., Kelly, P.H., Davison, A.J.: Gaussian splatting slam. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.06741 (2023) 2, 3, 8
22. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng,
R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In: Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 405–421. Springer (2020) 2, 4
23. Müller, T., Evans, A., Schied, C., Keller, A.: Instant neural graphics primitives with
a multiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 41(4), 1–
15 (2022) 2, 10, 11
24. Mur-Artal, R., Tardós, J.D.: Orb-slam2: An open-source slam system for monoc-
ular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. IEEE transactions on robotics 33(5), 1255–1262
(2017) 1
25. Ost, J., Mannan, F., Thuerey, N., Knodt, J., Heide, F.: Neural scene graphs for
dynamic scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 2856–2865 (2021) 4
26. Pun, A., Sun, G., Wang, J., Chen, Y., Yang, Z., Manivasagam, S., Ma, W.C.,
Urtasun, R.: Neural lighting simulation for urban scenes. Advances in Neural In-
formation Processing Systems 36 (2024) 4
27. Qin, T., Li, P., Shen, S.: Vins-mono: A robust and versatile monocular visual-
inertial state estimator. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 34(4), 1004–1020 (2018)
1
28. Radl, L., Steiner, M., Parger, M., Weinrauch, A., Kerbl, B., Steinberger, M.:
Stopthepop: Sorted gaussian splatting for view-consistent real-time rendering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00525 (2024) 7
29. Rematas, K., Liu, A., Srinivasan, P.P., Barron, J.T., Tagliasacchi, A., Funkhouser,
T., Ferrari, V.: Urban radiance fields. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 12932–12942 (2022) 4
30. Schönberger, J.L., Frahm, J.M.: Structure-from-motion revisited. In: Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2016) 2, 3
31. Sucar, E., Liu, S., Ortiz, J., Davison, A.J.: imap: Implicit mapping and position-
ing in real-time. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision. pp. 6229–6238 (2021) 8
32. Sun, P., Kretzschmar, H., Dotiwalla, X., Chouard, A., Patnaik, V., Tsui, P., Guo,
J., Zhou, Y., Chai, Y., Caine, B., et al.: Scalability in perception for autonomous
driving: Waymo open dataset. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition. pp. 2446–2454 (2020) 3, 10, 12, 13
33. Turki, H., Zhang, J.Y., Ferroni, F., Ramanan, D.: Suds: Scalable urban dynamic
scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition. pp. 12375–12385 (2023) 4
34. Wang, H., Wang, J., Agapito, L.: Co-slam: Joint coordinate and sparse parametric
encodings for neural real-time slam. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 13293–13302 (2023) 2

<!-- page 17 -->
Abbreviated paper title
17
35. Whelan, T., Salas-Moreno, R.F., Glocker, B., Davison, A.J., Leutenegger, S.: Elas-
ticfusion: Real-time dense slam and light source estimation. The International Jour-
nal of Robotics Research 35(14), 1697–1716 (2016) 1
36. Wu, G., Yi, T., Fang, J., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Wei, W., Liu, W., Tian, Q., Wang,
X.: 4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene rendering. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.08528 (2023) 3
37. Yan, C., Qu, D., Wang, D., Xu, D., Wang, Z., Zhao, B., Li, X.: Gs-slam: Dense
visual slam with 3d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11700 (2023) 2,
3
38. Yan, Y., Lin, H., Zhou, C., Wang, W., Sun, H., Zhan, K., Lang, X., Zhou, X.,
Peng, S.: Street gaussians for modeling dynamic urban scenes. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.01339 (2024) 3, 4
39. Yang, J., Ivanovic, B., Litany, O., Weng, X., Kim, S.W., Li, B., Che, T., Xu, D.,
Fidler, S., Pavone, M., et al.: Emernerf: Emergent spatial-temporal scene decom-
position via self-supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.02077 (2023) 4
40. Yang, Z., Chen, Y., Wang, J., Manivasagam, S., Ma, W.C., Yang, A.J., Urtasun, R.:
Unisim: A neural closed-loop sensor simulator. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 1389–1399 (2023) 4
41. Yang, Z., Yang, H., Pan, Z., Zhu, X., Zhang, L.: Real-time photorealistic dynamic
scene representation and rendering with 4d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.10642 (2023) 3
42. Yugay, V., Li, Y., Gevers, T., Oswald, M.R.: Gaussian-slam: Photo-realistic dense
slam with gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10070 (2023) 2, 3
43. Zhang, K., Riegler, G., Snavely, N., Koltun, V.: Nerf++: Analyzing and improving
neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2010.07492 (2020) 4
44. Zhou, Q.Y., Park, J., Koltun, V.: Open3d: A modern library for 3d data processing.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1801.09847 (2018) 7
45. Zhou, X., Lin, Z., Shan, X., Wang, Y., Sun, D., Yang, M.H.: Drivinggaussian:
Composite gaussian splatting for surrounding dynamic autonomous driving scenes.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.07920 (2023) 3, 4
46. Zhu, Z., Peng, S., Larsson, V., Xu, W., Bao, H., Cui, Z., Oswald, M.R., Pollefeys,
M.: Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 12786–
12796 (2022) 2, 8
47. Zwicker, M., Pfister, H., Van Baar, J., Gross, M.: Ewa volume splatting. In: Pro-
ceedings Visualization, 2001. VIS’01. pp. 29–538. IEEE (2001) 2
