<!-- page 1 -->
1
Compact 3D Gaussian Splatting for Dense
Visual SLAM
Tianchen Deng, Yaohui Chen, Leyan Zhang, Jianfei Yang, Shenghai Yuan,Jiuming Liu,
Danwei Wang, Life Fellow, IEEE, Hesheng Wang, Senior Member, IEEE, Weidong Chen
AbstractŌĆöRecent work has shown that 3D Gaussian-based SLAM enables high-quality reconstruction, accurate pose estimation, and
real-time rendering of scenes. However, when we revisit the existing GS-based SLAM systems, we observe that the redundancy of the
Gaussian ellipsoids created by SLAM systems is significantly superior to those of the original 3D Gaussian Splatting methods. We
further quantitatively demonstrate the geometric similarity and the redundancy of 3D Gaussian scene representation, leading to high
memory and storage costs. To address this limitation, we propose a compact 3D Gaussian Splatting SLAM system that reduces the
number and the parameter size of Gaussian ellipsoids. A sliding window-based masking strategy is first proposed to reduce the
redundant ellipsoids. Then, a novel geometry codebook-based quantization method is proposed to further compress 3D Gaussian
geometric attributes. Robust and accurate pose estimation is achieved by a local-to-global bundle adjustment method with reprojection
loss. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method achieves faster training, rendering speed (226% increase), and low memory
usage (2.21├Ś compression) while maintaining the state-of-the-art (SOTA) quality of the scene representation.
https://github.com/dtc111111/CompactGSSLAM
Index TermsŌĆö3D Gaussian Splatting, Dense Visual SLAM, Model Compression
Ō£”
1
INTRODUCTION
S
IMULTANEOUS localization and mapping (SLAM) has
been a fundamental computer vision problem with wide
applications such as autonomous driving, robotics, and vir-
tual/augmented reality [1], [2]. Several traditional methods,
including ORBSLAM [3], [4], VINS [5], etc. [6], [7], [8], have
been introduced over the years, representing scenes with
sparse point cloud maps. Due to the sparse nature of the
point cloud, it is difficult for human to understand machine
reactions with scene. Attention has turned to dense scene
reconstruction, exemplified by DTAM [9], Kintinuous [10],
and ElasticFusion [11]. However, their accuracy remains
unsatisfactory due to high memory costs, slow processing
speeds, and real-time running limitations.
Nowadays, with the proposal of Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF), many works focus on combining implicit scene
representation with SLAM systems. iMAP [12] is the first
method to use a single MLP to represent the scene. NICE-
SLAM [13], ESLAM [14], Co-SLAM [15], and PLGSLAM [16]
further improve the scene representation with the hybrid
feature grids, axis-aligned feature planes, joint coordinate-
parametric encoding, and progressive scene representation.
To further improve the speed of rendering, recent methods
have started to explore 3D Gaussian Splatting(GS) [17] inte-
gration with SLAM, such as SplaTAM [18], GS-SLAM [19],
ŌĆó
Tianchen Deng, Yaohui Chen, Leyan Zhang, Jiuming Liu, and Hesheng
Wang are with the Institute of Medical Robotics and Department of
Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai 200240, China.
Danwei Wang, Shenghai Yuan, and Jianfei Yang are with the School
of Electrical and Electronic Engineering, Nanyang Technological Uni-
versity, Singapore. This research is supported by the National Research
Foundation, Singapore, under the NRF Medium Sized Centre scheme
(CARTIN), Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore under its Maritime
Transformation Programme (Project No. SMI-2022-MTP-04), ASTAR
under National Robotics Programme with Grant No. M22NBK0109.
Mono-GS [20], Gaussian-SLAM [21]. GS-based SLAM meth-
ods leverage a point-based representation associated with
3D Gaussian attributes and adopt the rasterization pipeline
to render the images, achieving fast rendering speed and
promising image quality. However, we revisit the perfor-
mance of various GS-based SLAM systems [18], [19], [20],
[21] and perform a quantitative analysis and validation of
the geometric similarity. We have noticed that the Gaussian
ellipsoids generated by SLAM systems exhibit significantly
greater geometric similarities compared to those produced
by the original 3D Gaussian Splatting method. This simi-
larity stem from the optimization approach of the SLAM
system. The substantial number of 3D Gaussian ellipsoids
leads to high memory usage and storage requirements. They
usually need more than 500MB to represent a small room-
sized scene, which hinders practical deployment, especially
on resource-constrained devices.
To address the scene representation redundancy, we
propose a compact 3D Gaussian-based SLAM framework
to address the critical high memory demand and slow train-
ing speed issue in GS-based SLAM systems. Our method
notably enhances storage efficiency while delivering high-
quality reconstruction, fast training speed, and real-time
rendering capabilities. First, we design a novel sliding
window-based online masking method to remove the mil-
lions of redundant and unnecessary 3D Gaussian ellipsoids
created during the SLAM system operation, achieving faster
rendering speed and efficient memory usage since the com-
putational complexity is linearly proportional to the number
of 3D Gaussian ellipsoids.
Second, a codebook-based quantization method is de-
signed to compress the attributes (opacity, scale, rotation,
color) of each Gaussian ellipsoid. It learns to find the similar-
ities and geometry shared across the scene. We only store the
arXiv:2403.11247v2  [cs.CV]  27 Sep 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
2
Fig. 1. Our framework minimizes storage and accelerates rendering while maintaining the SOTA image reconstruction performance. The proposed
framework eliminates unnecessary 3D Gaussian ellipsoids without affecting performance. We highlight and enlarge some areas to show the
significant reduction of 3D Gaussian points.
codebook index for each 3D Gaussian ellipsoid, obtaining
compact scene representation.
Third, the camera tracking accuracy of GS-based SLAM
is relatively low compared with other SLAM systems. A
local-to-global BA method with reprojection loss is pro-
posed to achieve robust and accurate pose estimation. Our
method maintains a global keyframe database and performs
bundle adjustment with all the historical observations,
which can effectively eliminate cumulative error. Overall,
our contributions are shown as follows:
ŌĆó
We revisit the existing GS-based SLAM systems of
the scene representation. We quantitatively analyze
and demonstrate this geometric similarity, theoreti-
cally proving the feasibility and significance of com-
pressing the scene representation in GS-based SLAM
systems.
ŌĆó
We propose a novel compact Gaussian scene repre-
sentation SLAM framework, achieving fast training
and rendering speed, accurate pose estimation, and
significantly enhancing storage efficiency.
ŌĆó
A novel sliding window-based online masking
method is proposed to remove the number of re-
dundant Gaussian ellipsoids while achieving high-
fidelity performance during training. A KNN-based
codebook quantization method to efficiently restore
the geometry of each Gaussian point during the
SLAM system operation. A keyframe-based local-to-
global BA method with reprojection loss is proposed
to improve the relatively low performance of camera
tracking.
ŌĆó
We conduct comprehensive experiments on different
datasets and achieve nearly 226% increase in render-
ing speed and over 2.21├Ś compression on memory
usage.
2
RELATED WORK
Dense Visual SLAM. SLAM has become an active field
for the past two decades. Traditional visual SLAM algo-
rithms [3] estimate accurate camera poses and use sparse
point clouds as the map representation. They use ma-
nipulated key points for tracking, mapping, relocaliza-
tion, and loop closing. DTAM [9] is the first method to
achieve dense scene reconstruction. Kinectfusion [22] uses
projective iterative-closet-point (ICP) for camera tracking.
Some learning-based methods integrate traditional geome-
try frameworks with deep learning networks for accurate
camera tracking and mapping, such as DROID-SLAM [23].
It achieves impressive trajectory estimations by using neu-
ral networks to leverage richer context from images with
RAFT [24] feature. CodeSLAM [25] propose a dense rep-
resentation of scene geometry which is conditioned on the
intensity data from a single image and generated from a
code consisting of a small number of parameters. DPVO [26]
propose a novel recurrent network architecture designed for
tracking image patches across time. In contrast to previous
SLAM approaches, we adopt implicit scene representation
of the geometry and directly optimize them during mapping
for accurate and dense scene representation.
NeRF-based SLAM. With the proposal of Neural radiance
fields (NeRF) [27], many researchers explore taking advan-
tage of the implicit method into SLAM systems. iMAP [12]
is the first method to use a single multi-layer perceptron
(MLP) to represent the scene, and NICE-SLAM [13]uses
learnable hierarchical feature grids. Vox-Fusion [28] em-
ploys octree architecture for dynamic map scalability. ES-
LAM [14] and Co-SLAM [15] further improve the scene rep-
resentation with tri-planes and joint coordinate-parametric
encoding. PLGSLAM [16] proposes a novel progressive
scene representation method which dynamically allocates
new local scene representation trained with frames within a
local sliding window, achieving high-accuracy scene recon-
struction in large-scale scenes. Point-SLAM [29] uses neural
point clouds for the scene representation. It allows dynam-
ically adapting the anchor point density to the information
density of the input. Instead of representing maps with
neural implicit features, our method utilizes the explicit 3D
Gaussian representation, which can significantly improve

<!-- page 3 -->
3
Fig. 2. The pipeline of our GS-based SLAM system. The input of our system is RGB-D images. We start the SLAM system by initializing the 3D
Gaussian map construct. Then, we update our 3D Gaussian map by adding new Gaussians and using the learnable mask to reduce the redundant
3D Gaussian ellipsoids. We incorporate a codebook-based vector quantization method to compress the scene representation. For camera tracking,
we maintain a global keyframe database for local-to-global BA and use reprojection loss for robust pose estimation.
the rendering speed using splatting-based rasterization.
GS-based
SLAM.
Recently,
3D
Gaussian
Splatting
(3DGS) [17] using 3D Gaussians as primitives for real-time
neural rendering. 3DGS utilizes highly optimized custom
CUDA kernels and novel algorithmic approaches, which
achieve significant improvements in rendering speed with-
out sacrificing image quality. SplaTAM [18], GS-SLAM [19],
MonoGS [21], Gaussian-SLAM [20] are the pioneer works
that successfully combine the advantages of 3D Gaussian
Splatting with SLAM. These methods achieve fast rendering
speed and high-fidelity reconstruction performance. How-
ever, we revisit all the exisiting GS-based methods and
observe that the similarity of the 3D Gaussian ellipsoids is
really high. The memory and storage usage are also heavy in
these GS-based SLAM systems, which makes them difficult
to use in real-world scenarios and with handheld devices.
3
METHOD
The pipeline of our system is shown in Fig. 2. The input
of our system is sequential RGB-D frames {Ii, Di}M
i=1 with
known camera intrinsic K ŌłłR3├Ś3. Our system simul-
taneously reconstructs a dense scene map and estimates
camera poses {Ri|ti}M
i=1. For the mapping thread, a compact
3D Gaussian scene representation (Sec. 3.1) is designed
to represent the environments with sliding window-based
masks (Sec. 3.2) and geometry codebook (Sec. 3.3). For
the camera tracking thread, a global bundle adjustment
method (Sec. 3.4) is designed for robust and accurate pose
estimation. The network is incrementally updated with the
SLAM system operation.
3.1
Revisit GS-Based SLAM Systems
Recently, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [17] has employed
3D Gaussians as the fundamental elements for real-time
neural rendering. By leveraging highly optimized cus-
tom CUDA kernels, 3DGS achieves a substantial boost
in rendering speed while maintaining high image qual-
ity. SplaTAM [18], GS-SLAM [19], MonoGS [21], Gaussian-
SLAM [20] are the pioneer works that successfully combine
the advantages of 3D Gaussian Splatting with SLAM. These
methods achieve fast rendering speed and high-fidelity re-
construction performance.
However, we revisit the scene representation of these
GS-based SLAM systems and observe that the geometry
similarity of the 3D Gaussian ellipsoids is really high and
some of them are redundant. For all the GS-based SLAM
systems, the scene representation can defined as:
G(x) = oeŌłÆ1
2 (xŌłÆ┬Ą)T ╬ŻŌłÆ1(xŌłÆ┬Ą)
(1)
Eq. 1 is the original representation of 3D Gaussian ellipsoids.
╬Ż = RSST RT
(2)
The scene can be represented with a number of small
Gaussian ellipsoids with 3D geometry attributes (scale and
rotation matrix S, R).
Then, the 3D Gaussian ellipsoids are used to render
2D images with the technique of splatting. The covariance
matrix ╬ŻŌĆ▓ in camera coordinates can be formulated as:
╬ŻŌĆ▓ = JW ╬ŻW T JT
(3)
where W denotes the view direction, J denotes the projec-
tion transformation matrix.
In order to analyze the geometry similarity of 3D gaus-
sian ellipsoids G1,G2, we adopt the Kullback-Leibler diver-
gence and extended it to 3D Gaussians formulation:
DKL(G1(x)ŌłźG2(x)) = ExŌł╝G1(x)

log G1(x)
G2(x)

= ExŌł╝G1(x) [log G1(x)]
+ ExŌł╝G1(x) [ŌłÆlog G2(x)]
(4)
Since both G1(x), G2(x) follow the normal distribution, the
equation can be transformed into:
DKL(G1(x)ŌłźG2(x)) = 1
2
h
(┬Ą1 ŌłÆ┬Ą2)ŌŖż╬ŻŌłÆ1
2 (┬Ą1 ŌłÆ┬Ą2)
ŌłÆlog det(╬ŻŌłÆ1
2 ╬Ż1) + tr(╬ŻŌłÆ1
2 ╬Ż1) ŌłÆn
i
(5)
Then we normalized the 3D Gaussian ellipsoids G1,G2 to
an unbiased Gaussian distribution N(0, ╬Ż1), N(0, ╬Ż2), and
the geometry similarities can be formulated as:
DKL = 1
2ntr(╬ŻŌłÆ1
1 ╬Ż2) ŌłÆ1
2 + 1
2nlndet(╬ŻŌłÆ1
1 ╬Ż2)
(6)

<!-- page 4 -->
4
Fig. 3. The core distinctions between GS-based SLAM systems and
original 3DGS: the data processing and keyframe selection.
where n is the dimension of the covariance matrix. We
conduct various benchmark and present our results on
Tab. 1 and Fig. 4. We conduct experiments on all the open-
sourced GS-based SLAM systems. In Fig. 4, the larger the
area of the blue region, the lower the similarity between the
Gaussian spheres. Conversely, a smaller area and a higher
peak indicate a higher similarity between the Gaussian
spheres. We can see that the percentage of 3D Gaussian
ellipsoids is significantly elevated in a small range of KL
divergence, which demonstrates the geometric similarities
of the 3D Gaussian ellipsoids shared across the scene. Our
experiments also show that the similarities of 3D Gaussians
of the GS-based SLAM system are greater than the original
3DGS. In Fig. 3, we present the dataset processing and
online optimization process of GS-based SLAM systems and
the original 3DGS. There are two core distinctions: 1) the
data processing procedure. During the training process of
GS-based SLAM systems, all images are input sequentially
based on their timestamp, with each subsequent frame
being processed only after the training of the previous
frame is completed, while 3DGS directly inputs all images
and performs simultaneous optimization across them. 2)
the keyframe selection strategy. For the keyframe selection
strategy, the 3D Gaussian ellipsoids are constructed through
an online incremental optimization scheme, where only
keyframes are selectively optimized during the scene refine-
ment process in GS-based SLAM systems. Conversely, the
original GS method employs a strategy of random sampling
across the entire set of images. The online optimization
strategy employed by SLAM systems has, to a certain extent,
exacerbated the geometric similarity of the 3D Gaussian
ellipsoids within the scene.
To this end, we identified the issue of redundancy within
GS-SLAM systems and proposed a compact 3DGS represen-
tation tailored for SLAM systems, significantly improving
the training speed, memory, and storage usage, which is
really important to use in real-world scenarios and with
handheld devices.
3.2
Sliding Window-based Mask
The existing GS-based SLAM systems, such as SplaTAM [18]
and GS-SLAM [19], directly use the original 3DGS for scene
representation, achieving promising image quality. How-
ever, the original 3DGS creates a number of redundant 3D
Gaussian ellipsoids with the SLAM system operation(├Ś1.52
Gaussian ellipsoids show similar performance in Fig.5),
while both of these methods fail to discover this. This finally
results in poor performance in training speed, memory,
and storage usage, which is crucial for online SLAM sys-
tems. Some methods [30], [31], [32] propose novel Gaussian
pruning and self-organizing methods to compact the 3DGS
attributes. However, all of these strategies are not suitable
for GS-based SLAM systems as they have to obtain all the
images, pose, and the corresponding point cloud at the be-
ginning, while SLAM systems are incrementally optimized.
To this end, we propose a learnable sliding window-
based mask strategy to remove the redundant 3D Gaussian
ellipsoids tailored for the SLAM system. Compared to the
original densification method, which only considers the
opacity, our method takes into account both the volume
V and opacity o Ōłł[0, 1] of Gaussian ellipsoids. The vol-
ume calculation is V
=
4
3ŽĆabc, where abc are the three
dimensions of the scale S. We introduce a learnable mask
parameter m ŌłłRNw and a corresponding binary mask
M Ōłł{0, 1}Nw, Nw is the number of Gaussian ellipsoids
within the sliding window:
Mn = sg (I [Sig (mn) > ŽĄ] ŌłÆSig (mn)) + Sig (mn)
(7)
╦å
Sn = MnSn,
╦åon = Mnon
(8)
where n is the index of the Gaussian ellipsoids, ŽĄ denotes the
mask threshold. Inspired by [33], we employ the stop gradi-
ent operator sg(┬Ę) to calculate gradients from binary masks.
I and Sig(┬Ę) denote the indicator and sigmoid function.
This formulation of mask strategy allows us to effectively
combine the influence of volume ( ╦å
Sn) and opacity( ╦åon) of
Gaussian ellipsoids. We utilize ╦å
Sn, ╦åon in the color and depth
rendering. Then, We formulate the loss function Lm of our
mask:
Lm =
1
Nw
Nw
X
n=1
Sig(mn),
h = I(G(x), ri)
(9)
h represents the hit count of each 3D Gaussian within
a sliding window. In order to better fit the online updating
SLAM systems, we further improve the masking strategy
by adding frustum culling and sliding window-based reset
strategy, shown in Fig. 5. Our frustum culling strategy
allows us to optimize only the mask within the current
viewing frustum while keeping the rest of the 3D Gaussian
ellipsoids fixed. It will not only preserve the previously re-
constructed geometry but also significantly reduce the num-
ber of parameters during optimization. Different from the
original densification strategy performed on every frame,

<!-- page 5 -->
5
TABLE 1
The KL divergence analysis of GS-based SLAM systems and original 3DGS.
SplaTAM [18]
MonoGS [21]
Gaussian-SLAM [21]
3DGS [17]
Range
Percentage
Range
Percentage
Range
Percentage
Range
Percentage
(-2.5%,2.5%)
87.67%
(-2.5%,2.5%)
83.67%
(-2.5%,2.5%)
88.37%
(-2.5%,2.5%)
20.07%
(-5.0%,5.0%)
97.86%
(-5.0%,5.0%)
95.86%
(-5.0%,5.0%)
94.45%
(-5.0%,5.0%)
37.04%
(-7.5%,7.5%)
99.16%
(-7.5%,7.5%)
98.91%
(-7.5%,7.5%)
97.21%
(-7.5%,7.5%)
47.69%
(-10.0%,10.0%)
99.52%
(-10.0%,10.0%)
99.28%
(-10.0%,10.0%)
99.37%
(-10.0%,10.0%)
52.16%
Fig. 4. The KL divergence distribution of the Gaussian ellipsoids with the online training of the SLAM system on different time steps (500, 1000,
1500, 2000). A larger area of the blue region signifies lower similarity between the 3D Gaussian ellipsoids, whereas a smaller area and a higher
peak indicate greater similarity between the Gaussian ellipsoids. We can observe that the similarity in geometry consistently remains at a high level
of GS-based SLAM system.
we only perform mask on the keyframe (each kth frame) for
efficiency and accuracy.
Furthermore, we maintain a local sliding window and
perform a sliding window reset to avoid the continuous
optimization and accumulated gradient of masks which
will ultimately eliminate all Gaussian ellipsoids. We also
calculate the hit count of each Gaussian. When moving to
the bound of the sliding window, we remove the redundant
Gaussian ellipsoids by evaluating their hit frequency in
conjunction with the learned mask. The sliding window
consists of the current frame, the most relevant keyframe,
and n ŌłÆ2 previous keyframes, which have the highest
overlap with the current frame. Overlap is evaluated by
analyzing the point cloud of the current frameŌĆÖs depth map
and tallying points within the frustum of each keyframe.
This can also ensure the consistency of the mask within
the local sliding window. This approach allows us to con-
tinuously mask out unnecessary Gaussians during online
SLAM system operation, effectively reducing computation
overhead and ensuring efficient memory usage on GPU.

<!-- page 6 -->
6
Fig. 5. The left figure shows the learnable mask strategy. We perform frustum selection and sliding widow reset to remove redundant Gaussian
ellipsoids while maintaining the reconstruction accuracy efficiently. The dashed lines represent the removed 3D Gaussian ellipsoids. The right figure
shows the varying count of Gaussian ellipsoids during the SLAM system operation. These two curves show the distinction between our system with
and without masks. Our mask strategy achieves 1.97 ├Ś compression on the number of 3D Gaussians.
Fig. 6. The R-VQ process to represent the scale and rotation of Gaussian ellipsoids. In the first stage, we cluster the scale and rotation vectors and
randomly select codebook initialization with the closest code. In the subsequent stage, the residual between the original vector and the result from
the first stage is stored in another codebook. This iterative process continues through to the ultimate stage, at which point, the collectively chosen
indices and codebook from each stage provide a representation of the original vector.
3.3
Geometry Codebook and Quantization
In this section, we analyze and observe the geometry simi-
larities of the Gaussian ellipsoids created by SLAM systems.
Then, we propose a learnable codebook and employ a resid-
ual vector quantization method to reduce computational
complexity and memory usage and further improve the
training and rendering speed.
Based on the similarity, we propose a learnable codebook
to compress the geometry attributes (scale and rotation),
shown in Fig. 6. Inspired by SoundStream [34] and En-
codec [35], we incorporate the residual vector quantization
(R-VQ) to compress the scale and rotation. It cascades L
stages of VQ and is formulated as follows:
╦åSl
n =
l
X
k=1
Ck h
iki
,
l Ōłł{1, . . . , L},
il
n = argmin
k
Cl[k] ŌłÆ

Sn ŌłÆ╦åSlŌłÆ1
n

2
2 ,
╦åS0
n = ŌłÆŌåÆ0
(10)
where S ŌłłRN├Ś4 is the scale vector, ╦åSl ŌłłRN├Ś4 is the
output scale vector after l stages quantization. n denotes the
index of the Gaussian ellipsoids. Cl denotes the codebook at
the stage l. Cl represents the vector at index i of the codebook
C. The formulation of the rotation vector is the same. Then,
the loss function is defined as:
Lr =
1
NP
L
X
k=1
N
X
n=1
sg
h
Sn ŌłÆ╦åSkŌłÆ1
n
i
ŌłÆCk h
ik
n
i
2
2
(11)
where P is the size of codebook, sg[┬Ę] is the stop gradient
operator. The codebook size is set to 64, and the stage is set
to 6. After this, we can only store the codebook compressed
scale and rotation vector, which can significantly reduce
storage and memory usage.
In order to further quantize the attributes stored in
3D Gaussian ellipsoids, we create additional codebooks
for opacity and the 3-channel color component. Our ex-
periments show that 1-byte indices allow maximum com-
pression with minimal quality degradation of color and
opacity. So, we set the size of the codebook to 256 en-

<!-- page 7 -->
7
Fig. 7. The rendering visualization results on the Replica dataset [36] of the proposed GS-based SLAM system compared with other SOTA methods.
We present the rendering PSNR and FPS on the image. Our method can achieve faster rendering speed and high-quality image reconstruction
performance compared with other methods.
TABLE 2
Camera tracking results on Replica dataset [36]. We use the ATE
RMSE Ōåō[cm] as the metric and compare it with other SOTA methods.
Best results are highlighted as first , second , and third .
Methods
Avg.
R0
R1
R2
Of0
Of1
Of2
Of3
Of4
Vox-Fusion [28]
3.09
1.37 4.70 1.47 8.48 2.04 2.58 1.11 2.94
NICE-SLAM [13]
1.06
0.97 1.31 1.07 0.88 1.00 1.06 1.10 1.13
ESLAM [14]
0.63
0.71 0.70 0.52 0.57 0.55 0.58 0.72 0.63
Co-SLAM [15]
0.78
0.61 0.79 0.96 0.54 0.52 1.13 0.97 0.74
Point-SLAM [29]
0.52
0.61 0.41 0.37 0.38 0.48 0.54 0.69 0.72
SplaTAM [18]
0.34
0.31 0.40 0.29 0.47 0.27 0.29 0.32 0.55
MonoGS [21]
0.37
0.33 0.35 0.31 0.45 0.29 0.28 0.28 0.75
Gaussian-SLAM [20]
0.35
0.29 0.34 0.25 0.43 0.26 0.41 0.33 0.47
Ours
0.31
0.27 0.31 0.25 0.41 0.23 0.27 0.29 0.48
tries. Hence, with this quantization strategy, we reduce
the request memory for these attributes from 4N ├Ś 4bytes
to 4N + 2 ├Ś 256├Śbytes. N represents the number of 3D
Gaussians. Since N can be a number in the hundreds of
thousands or millions with the SLAM system operation, our
compact scene representation can significantly reduce the
memory and storage usage.
3.4
Tracking and Global Bundle Adjustment
Our tracking and bundle adjustment are performed by
minimizing our objective functions. The camera pose is
initialized for a new time step by a constant velocity forward
projection of the pose parameters. For each pixel p, the color
TABLE 3
Camera tracking results on ScanNet datasets [37]. We use the ATE
RMSE Ōåō[cm] as the metric and compare it with other SOTA methods.
Methods
Avg.
0000
0059
0106
0169
0181 0207
Vox-Fusion [28]
26.90 68.84 24.18
8.41
27.28 23.30 9.41
NICE-SLAM [13]
10.88 12.00 14.00
7.90
10.90 13.40 6.20
Co-SLAM [15]
8.72
7.35
11.45
9.68
6.03
11.93 8.86
ESLAM [14]
7.82
7.84
9.24
7.82
6.78
9.35
5.88
Point-SLAM [29]
12.19 10.24
7.81
8.65
22.16 14.77 9.54
SplaTAM [18]
11.88 12.83 10.10 17.72 12.08 11.10 7.46
MonoGS [21]
11.88 12.83 10.10 17.72 12.08 11.10 7.46
Gaussian-SLAM [20] 11.88 12.83 10.10 17.72 12.08 11.10 7.46
Ours
10.84 11.28
9.24
16.25 11.01 10.82 6.49
and opacity of all Gaussian ellipsoids are computed and
blended using this formula:
C(p) =
X
iŌłłN
cifi(p)
iŌłÆ1
Y
j=1
(1 ŌłÆfj(p))
(12)
where ci denotes the color of Gaussian ellipsoids. We also
propose a similar depth rendering formula:
D(p) =
n
X
i=1
difi(p)
iŌłÆ1
Y
j=1
(1 ŌłÆfj(p))
(13)
We also render a silhouette image to determine visibility:
S(p) =
n
X
i=1
fi(p)
iŌłÆ1
Y
j=1
(1 ŌłÆfj(p))
(14)

<!-- page 8 -->
8
Fig. 8. The rendering visualization results on the TUM RGB-D dataset [38] of the proposed GS-based SLAM system compared with other SOTA
methods. We present the rendering PSNR/FPS on the RGB image and depth L1/FPS [cm] on the depth image. Our method can achieve faster
rendering speed and high-quality image reconstruction performance compared with other methods.
TABLE 4
Camera tracking results on TUM RGB-D dataset [38]. We use the ATE
RMSE Ōåō[cm] as the metric and compare it with other SOTA methods.
Methods
Avg. fr1/desk fr1/desk2 fr1/room fr2/xyz fr3/office
Kintinuous [10]
4.84
3.70
7.10
7.50
2.90
3.00
ElasticFusion [11]
6.91
2.53
6.83
21.49
1.17
2.52
ORB-SLAM2 [4]
1.98
1.60
2.20
4.70
0.40
1.00
NICE-SLAM [13]
15.87
4.26
4.99
34.49
31.73
3.87
Vox-Fusion [28]
11.31
3.52
6.00
19.53
1.49
26.01
Point-SLAM [29]
8.92
4.34
4.54
30.92
1.31
3.48
SplaTAM [18]
5.48
3.35
6.54
11.13
1.24
5.16
MonoGS [21]
5.48
3.35
6.54
11.13
1.24
5.16
Gaussian-SLAM [20]
5.48
3.35
6.54
11.13
1.24
5.16
Ours
5.17
2.95
6.13
10.85
1.03
4.88
The color and depth loss is defined as:
Lc = 1
N
N
X
i=1

╦åCi ŌłÆCi
2
,
Ld =
1
|Ri|
X
iŌłłRi

╦å
Di ŌłÆDi
2
(15)
where Ri is the set of rays that have a valid depth ob-
servation. The reprojection error is common in traditional
SLAM methods based on sparse point clouds [4]. Since 3D
Gaussian is also based on a point cloud representation,
we introduce this loss for the first time to improve the
sceneŌĆÖs geometric representation and consistency further.
We formulate reprojection errors with SIFT features:
Lre =
n
X
i=1
Ōłź(uiŌĆ▓, viŌĆ▓) ŌłÆ╬Ā(RiŌåÆiŌĆ▓Pi + tiŌåÆiŌĆ▓)Ōłź
(16)
where ╬Ā(RiŌåÆiŌĆ▓Pi + tiŌåÆiŌĆ▓) represents the reprojection of 3D
point Pi to the corresponding pixel (uiŌĆ▓, viŌĆ▓) in image iŌĆ▓. The
tracking loss is formulated as follows:
Lt =
X
p
(S(p) > 0.99) (Lc + ╬╗1Ld + ╬╗2Lre)
(17)
We use the rendered visibility silhouette to select the well-
optimized pixels for camera tracking, which can improve
the tracking accuracy for the new frames.
Local-to-Global Bundle Adjustment. For global consis-
tency and accuracy, our system maintains a significantly
larger global keyframe database than other GS-based SLAM
systems. We randomly sample a total number of N rays from
our global keyframe database to optimize our scene repre-
sentation as well as camera poses. This phase optimizes a
loss similar to tracking loss, and we also add an SSIM loss

<!-- page 9 -->
9
TABLE 5
Quantitative image reconstruction performance on Replica dataset [36]. We use the PSNR Ōåæ, SSIM Ōåæ, and LPIPS Ōåōas the metrics and compare
them with other SOTA methods.
Methods
Metrics
Average
Room0
Room1
Room2
Office0
Office1
Office2
Office3
Office4
Co-SLAM [15]
PSNRŌåæ
30.24
27.27
28.45
29.06
34.14
34.87
28.43
28.76
30.91
SSIMŌåæ
0.94
0.91
0.91
0.93
0.96
0.97
0.94
0.94
0.96
LPIPSŌåō
0.25
0.32
0.29
0.27
0.21
0.20
0.26
0.23
0.24
ESLAM [14]
PSNRŌåæ
29.08
25.32
27.77
29.08
33.71
30.20
28.09
28.77
29.71
SSIMŌåæ
0.93
0.86
0.90
0.93
0.96
0.92
0.94
0.95
0.95
LPIPSŌåō
0.25
0.31
0.30
0.25
0.18
0.23
0.24
0.20
0.20
NICE-SLAM [13]
PSNRŌåæ
24.42
22.12
22.47
24.52
29.07
30.34
19.66
22.23
24.49
SSIMŌåæ
0.81
0.69
0.76
0.81
0.87
0.89
0.80
0.80
0.86
LPIPSŌåō
0.23
0.33
0.27
0.21
0.23
0.18
0.24
0.21
0.20
Point-SLAM [29]
PSNRŌåæ
35.17
32.40
34.08
35.50
38.26
39.16
33.99
33.48
33.49
SSIMŌåæ
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.99
0.96
0.96
0.98
LPIPSŌåō
0.12
0.11
0.12
0.11
0.10
0.12
0.16
0.13
0.14
SplaTAM [18]
PSNRŌåæ
34.11
32.86
33.89
35.25
38.26
39.17
31.97
29.70
31.81
SSIMŌåæ
0.97
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.97
0.95
0.95
LPIPSŌåō
0.10
0.07
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.15
PSNRŌåæ
34.44
32.98
34.08
35.35
38.16
39.07
32.37
31.08
32.31
SSIMŌåæ
0.98
0.99
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.96
0.96
SplaTam+Ours
LPIPSŌåō
0.09
0.07
0.10
0.08
0.09
0.09
0.10
0.12
0.15
MonoGS [21]
PSNRŌåæ
37.24
34.51
36.27
37.27
39.45
41.98
36.07
36.45
35.88
SSIMŌåæ
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.96
0.96
0.95
LPIPSŌåō
0.080
0.08
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.11
PSNRŌåæ
37.31
34.58
36.27
37.31
39.27
42.05
36.28
36.72
36.07
SSIMŌåæ
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.96
0.96
0.96
MonoGS+Ours
LPIPSŌåō
0.076
0.07
0.08
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.06
0.10
Gaussian-SLAM [20]
PSNRŌåæ
37.51
34.78
36.83
37.31
39.15
41.68
36.85
37.15
36.38
SSIMŌåæ
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.96
0.96
0.96
LPIPSŌåō
0.078
0.08
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.11
PSNRŌåæ
37.76
34.58
37.23
37.51
39.63
42.39
36.98
37.25
36.49
SSIMŌåæ
0.98
0.97
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.98
0.96
0.96
0.96
Gaussian-SLAM+Ours
LPIPSŌåō
0.076
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.07
0.07
0.08
0.06
0.11
to RGB rendering. The local-to-global bundle adjustment
is performed to optimize the scene representation with the
camera pose. Our local-to-global BA method can effectively
reduce cumulative errors and enhance the robustness of
pose estimation, especially for long sequences and large
scenes.
4
EXPERIMENTS
Datasets and Evaluation Metrics. We evaluate our method
on various datasets: Replica [36], Scannet [37], and TUM-
RGBD [38], following the settings form SplaTAM [18]. The
replica is a synthetic dataset, and we select eight small
room scene sequences for evaluation. We select six real-
world scenes from the ScanNet [37] dataset for relatively
large-scale indoor scenes. We also select five scenes from
the TUM RGB-D [38] dataset as it is a common dataset
for evaluating camera tracking accuracy. We follow the
evaluation metrics from SplaTAM [18]. We use PSNR, SSIM,
and LPIPS to measure rendering performance. For camera
pose estimation, we use the average absolute trajectory error
(ATE RMSE[cm] Ōåō).
Implementation Details. Our method is implemented in
Python using the PyTorch framework, incorporating CUDA
for Gaussian Splatting, and trained on a desktop PC with
NVIDIA RTX 3090Ti GPU. We extended the existing dif-
ferentiable Gaussian Splatting rasterization code by adding
functions to manage depth, pose, and cumulative opacity
during both forward and backward propagation.
Baselines. The main baseline method we compare to is
SplaTAM [18] as the representative of the GS-based SLAM
systems because it is the only open-sourced GS-based SLAM
system so far. Our method is also a plug-and-play method,
which can improve the speed and memory usage for all
GS-based methods. We also compared to other NeRF-based
SLAM methods, such as NICE-SLAM [13], Co-SLAM [15],
ESLAM [14], Vox-Fusion [28]. On the TUM-RGBD dataset,
we also compare against three traditional SLAM systems:
Kintinuous [10], ElasticFusion [11], and ORB-SLAM2 [4].
4.1
Experimental Results
In this section, we present our experimental results on three
different datasets. We evaluate the camera pose estimation,
the 3D Gaussian reconstruction, and the real-time perfor-
mance and memory usage of different SLAM systems.
Camera tracking results. In Tab. 2 3 4, we compare
our method with other SOTA methods on camera pose
estimation on different datasets. Best results are high-
lighted as
first ,
second , and
third . On the synthetic
dataset Replica [36], we can see that we successfully re-
duce the trajectory error over the GS-based SLAM system
(SplaTAM [18]) and achieve more accurate and robust pose
estimation, shown in Tab. 2. The ScanNet dataset is a real-
world dataset that has poor depth sensor information with
high motion blur on RGB images. In Tab. 3, our method per-
forms better than the GS-based SLAM system and similarly
to the previous NeRF-based SLAM systems. In Tab. 4, we
present the experimental results on TUM RGB-D datasets.
We can see that our approach still outperforms other GS-
based or NeRF-based methods, and the trajectory error has
nearly 10% reduction. Our experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness of our proposed reprojection loss, which can

<!-- page 10 -->
10
TABLE 6
Runtime and memory performance evaluation on Replica [36] and ScanNet [37] dataset. The Decoder Param denotes the parameter number of
MLPs. The memory is the memory usage of the checkpoint.
Datasets
Methods
Track/Iter. ŌåōMap/Iter. ŌåōTrack/Frame ŌåōMap/Frame ŌåōRender FPS ŌåæDecoder Param. ŌåōMemory Ōåō
Replica [36]
NICE-SLAM [13]
6.98ms
28.88ms
68.54ms
1.23s
0.30
0.06M
48.48MB
ESLAM [14]
6.85ms
19.98ms
54.80ms
0.29s
2.82
0.003M
27.12MB
Co-SLAM [15]
6.38ms
14.25ms
63.93ms
0.15s
3.68
0.013M
24.85MB
Point-SLAM [29]
0.57ms
34.85ms
22.72ms
10.47s
1.33
0.127M
55.42MB
SplaTAM [18]
24.23ms
22.83ms
2.18s
1.37s
175.64
0M
273.09MB
SplaTAM+Ours
16.87ms
15.75ms
1.52s
0.95s
398.28
0M
122.29MB
MonoGS [21]
15.39ms
12.49ms
1.54s
1.88s
317.45
0M
162.41MB
MonoGS+Ours
13.25ms
10.74ms
1.32s
1.61s
447.29
0M
108.39MB
Gaussian-SLAM [20]
14.09ms
20.85ms
0.79s
2.08s
321.39
0M
149.58MB
Gaussian-SLAM+Ours
13.65ms
17.97ms
0.81s
1.79s
458.53
0M
105.03MB
Scannet [37]
NICE-SLAM [13]
12.3ms
125.3ms
0.62s
7.52s
0.27
0.07M
84.25MB
ESLAM [14]
7.54ms
23.4ms
0.23s
0.70s
2.74
0.004M
67.95MB
Co-SLAM [15]
7.81ms
20.6ms
78ms
0.20s
3.41
0.015M
48.81MB
Point-SLAM [29]
0.63ms
42.29ms
64ms
12.69s
1.28
0.131M
57.21MB
SplaTAM [18]
28.32ms
26.37ms
2.55s
1.58s
155.69
0M
178.09MB
SplaTAM+Ours
20.91ms
19.25ms
1.99s
1.23s
387.93
0M
92.48MB
MonoGS [21]
18.21ms
16.91ms
1.82s
2.54s
301.39
0M
117.47MB
MonoGS+Ours
15.21ms
13.27ms
1.52s
1.98s
418.43
0M
74.35MB
Gaussian-SLAM [20]
16.49ms
19.93ms
3.29s
1.99s
314.39
0M
127.43MB
Gaussian-SLAM+Ours
15.33ms
16.34ms
3.06s
1.63s
423.18
0M
95.79MB
Fig. 9. We visualized the learned codebook indices for rotation vector in the replica dataset [36]. We can observe that as the stage progresses, the
distribution of the codebook becomes increasingly compact. We visualize all the stages of our codebook.
still improve the pose estimation accuracy with a number of
Gaussian ellipsoids removed.
Gaussian reconstruction results. In Tab. 5, we show the
rendering quality of the Replica dataset in 8 scenes. We
present the quantitative results on Replica dataset in Fig.
7, and TUM RGB-D dataset in Fig. 8. Our method achieves
similar PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS results as SplaTAM [18].
Our approach achieves much better results than the NeRF-
based baselines, such as Vox-Fusion [28], NICE-SLAM [13],
Co-SLAM [15], and ESLAM [14]. Overall, our method can
achieve better performance than the SOTA methods, while
the speed and memory usage are significantly lower than
other methods.
Real-time performance and memory usage. Tab. 6 illus-
trates the runtime performance and memory usage of our
method and other GS-based and NeRF-based SLAM sys-
tems on the Replica [36] room 0 scene and the ScanNet [37]
0000 scene. We follow the settings of SplaTAM for ŌĆśSplaTAM
+ OursŌĆÖ and use 90,60 iterations per frame for tracking
and mapping to get similar performance in [18]. We use
100, 150 iterations for tracking and mapping, following the
setting of MonoGS for ŌĆśMonoGS + OursŌĆÖ. We use 60, 100
iterations for tracking and mapping, following the setting
of Gaussian-SLAM for ŌĆśGaussian-SLAM + OursŌĆÖ in Replica
dataset and 200, 100 iterations in ScanNet dataset. We
evaluate the time consumption of tracking and mapping
every iteration and every frame. Each iteration of our system
renders a full 1200├Ś980 pixel image (in Replica dataset)
and 640├Ś480 pixel image (in ScanNet dataset). Compared
with the GS-based SLAM system, we significantly improve
the training speed (31% faster), which is crucial for online
SLAM systems, thanks to our compact 3D Gaussian scene
presentation method. We also evaluate the rendering speed,

<!-- page 11 -->
11
Fig. 10. We visualized the learned codebook indices for scale vector in the replica dataset [36]. We can observe that as the stage progresses, the
distribution of the codebook becomes increasingly compact. We visualize all the stages of our codebook.
TABLE 7
The ablation study on Replica [36] dataset. We conduct experiments to verify the effectiveness of our method. Our full model achieves better pose
estimation performance as well as faster training and rendering speed and lower memory usage.ŌĆÖHŌĆÖ represents hours.
Method
Accuracy
Real-time performance and Memory
PSNR Ōåæ
SSIM Ōåæ
LPIPS Ōåō
ATE RMSE Ōåō
Training Time Ōåō
Render FPSŌåæ
MemoryŌåō
w/o mask
32.72
0.96
0.11
0.28
1.91H
245.28
216.09MB
w/o rvq
32.87
0.97
0.10
0.27
1.47H
272.29
167.88MB
w/o rep. loss
32.80
0.97
0.10
0.30
1.37H
398.28
122.29MB
Ours
32.98
0.98
0.09
0.27
1.37H
398.28
122.29MB
TABLE 8
Some extended ablation experiments of camera tracking and color and
depth loss on Replica [36] room0 scene.
Sil. Thresh.
ATE
Depth L1 PSNR
w/o velo. prop.
0.99
2.75
2.05
25.57
w/o sil. mask
0.99
115.18
0.49
14.15
Ours
0.5
1.30
0.75
31.31
w/o track. and map. color
0.99
88.23
-
-
w/o track. and map. depth
0.99
1.38
12.87
31.05
Ours
0.99
0.25
0.46
32.88
the decoder parameters, and the memory of SOTA methods.
Compared with the NeRF-based SLAM system, we achieve
447.29 FPS rendering speed on the replica dataset, which
is 100├Ś significantly faster than these methods. Note that
we do not use any neural network decoder in our system,
which results in zero learnable parameters of the decoder.
Plug-and-Play on existing works It is extremely encour-
aged that our compact scene representation can serve as a
plug-and-play module, improving the memory and storage
efficiency of recent SOTA works[18], [20]. In Tab. 6, we incor-
porate our compact scene representation with their SLAM
systems. As shown in Tab. 6, our method achieves 226%
increase in rendering speed and over 2.21├Ś reduction in
memory usage, compared with SplaTAM [18]. Similarly, in-
troducing our compact scene representation in MonoGS [21]
can also improve their efficiency, nearly 141% increase in
rendering speed and 1.50├Ś reduction in memory usage.
4.2
Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct various experiments to verify the
effectiveness of our method. Tab. 7 illustrates a quantitative
evaluation with different settings on Replica [36] room0
scene.
Sliding window mask As shown in Tab. 7, the proposed
sliding window mask effectively reduces the number of 3D
Gaussian ellipsoids while retaining the image reconstruction
performance. This demonstrates that we successfully re-
move the redundant and unessential 3D Gaussian ellipsoids
created along with the SLAM system operation. Our mask
strategy shows 50% increase in the storage efficiency and a
26% increase in rendering speed.
Residual vector codebook Our proposed geometry code-
book method achieves a reduction in memory usage while
maintaining the image reconstruction performance. We also
present the scale and rotation codebook in different stages
in Fig. 9 and Fig. 10. As the stages progress, the magnitude
of the codes diminishes, demonstrating that the residuals
for each stage are being effectively trained to capture the
geometry accurately.
Reprojection loss In Tab. 7, we can see that the proposed
reprojection loss effectively improves the accuracy of camera
pose estimation. As the 3D Gaussian represents the scene
with a number of points, we use this reprojection loss to
build the bridge of 3D points with 2D features, which can

<!-- page 12 -->
12
further improve the scene representation and the camera
tracking accuracy.
Velocity propagation and silhouette mask We also conduct
ablation study on the camera tracking in Tab. 8: (1) the use
of forward velocity propagation, (2) the use of a silhouette
mask to mask out invalid map areas in the loss, and (3)
setting the silhouette threshold to 0.99 instead of 0.5. The
forward velocity propagation is vital for camera tracking.
We can see that silhouette is also critical as without it
tracking completely fails.
RGB and depth loss Our system use both photometric
(RGB) and depth loss in camera tracking and scene recon-
struction. In Tab. 8, we ablate the decision to use both and
investigate the performance of only use one or the other
for both tracking and mapping. We conduct the ablation
study on Replica dataset [36] scene room0. With only depth,
our method completely fails to track the camera trajectory,
because the L1 depth loss doesnŌĆÖt provide adequate in-
formation. Using only an RGB loss successfully tracks the
camera trajectory (although with more than 5x the error
as using both). Both the RGB and depth work together to
achieve excellent results.
5
CONCLUSION
In this paper, we revisit the existing GS-based SLAM sys-
tems and first demonstrate the geometric similarities of 3D
Gaussian ellipsoids. Then, we propose a novel compact GS-
based SLAM system, reducing the number of redundant
Gaussian ellipsoids without a decrease in performance. The
proposed sliding window mask method and the geometry
codebook improve the compactness of the scene represen-
tation, achieving faster training and rendering speed, and a
significant reduction in memory usage. The proposed global
bundle adjustment with reprojection loss further improves
the camera tracking accuracy and scene representation. The
extensive experiments demonstrate that our work provides
a comprehensive dense visual SLAM system, achieving
high-fidelity performance, fast training, compactness, and
real-time rendering.
REFERENCES
[1]
H. Durrant-Whyte and T. Bailey, ŌĆ£Simultaneous localization and
mapping: part i,ŌĆØ IEEE robotics & automation magazine, vol. 13, no. 2,
pp. 99ŌĆō110, 2006.
[2]
G. Reitmayr, T. Langlotz, D. Wagner, A. Mulloni, G. Schall,
D. Schmalstieg, and Q. Pan, ŌĆ£Simultaneous localization and map-
ping for augmented reality,ŌĆØ in 2010 International Symposium on
Ubiquitous Virtual Reality.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 5ŌĆō8.
[3]
R. Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tard┬┤os, ŌĆ£Orb-slam: A
versatile and accurate monocular slam system,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1147ŌĆō1163, 2015.
[4]
R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tard┬┤os, ŌĆ£Orb-slam2: An open-source slam
system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras,ŌĆØ IEEE Transac-
tions on Robotics, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1255ŌĆō1262, 2017.
[5]
T. Qin, P. Li, and S. Shen, ŌĆ£Vins-mono: A robust and versatile
monocular visual-inertial state estimator,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 34, no. 4, pp. 1004ŌĆō1020, 2018.
[6]
T. Deng, H. Xie, J. Wang, and W. Chen, ŌĆ£Long-term visual simul-
taneous localization and mapping: Using a bayesian persistence
filter-based global map prediction,ŌĆØ IEEE Robotics & Automation
Magazine, vol. 30, no. 1, pp. 36ŌĆō49, 2023.
[7]
H. Xie, T. Deng, J. Wang, and W. Chen, ŌĆ£Robust incremental long-
term visual topological localization in changing environments,ŌĆØ
IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 72, pp.
1ŌĆō14, 2022.
[8]
C. Cadena, L. Carlone, H. Carrillo, Y. Latif, D. Scaramuzza,
J. Neira, I. Reid, and J. J. Leonard, ŌĆ£Past, present, and future
of simultaneous localization and mapping: Toward the robust-
perception age,ŌĆØ IEEE Transactions on robotics, vol. 32, no. 6, pp.
1309ŌĆō1332, 2016.
[9]
R. A. Newcombe, S. J. Lovegrove, and A. J. Davison, ŌĆ£Dtam: Dense
tracking and mapping in real-time,ŌĆØ in 2011 international conference
on computer vision.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 2320ŌĆō2327.
[10] T. Whelan, M. Kaess, H. Johannsson, M. Fallon, J. J. Leonard,
and J. McDonald, ŌĆ£Real-time large-scale dense rgb-d slam with
volumetric fusion,ŌĆØ The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 34, no. 4-5, pp. 598ŌĆō626, 2015.
[11] T. Whelan, R. F. Salas-Moreno, B. Glocker, A. J. Davison, and
S. Leutenegger, ŌĆ£Elasticfusion: Real-time dense slam and light
source estimation,ŌĆØ The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 35, no. 14, pp. 1697ŌĆō1716, 2016.
[12] E. Sucar, S. Liu, J. Ortiz, and A. J. Davison, ŌĆ£imap: Implicit
mapping and positioning in real-time,ŌĆØ in ICCV, October 2021,
pp. 6229ŌĆō6238.
[13] Z. Zhu, S. Peng, V. Larsson, W. Xu, H. Bao, Z. Cui, M. R. Oswald,
and M. Pollefeys, ŌĆ£Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding
for slam,ŌĆØ in CVPR, June 2022, pp. 12 786ŌĆō12 796.
[14] M. M. Johari, C. Carta, and F. Fleuret, ŌĆ£Eslam: Efficient dense slam
system based on hybrid representation of signed distance fields,ŌĆØ
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 17 408ŌĆō17 419.
[15] H. Wang, J. Wang, and L. Agapito, ŌĆ£Co-slam: Joint coordinate
and sparse parametric encodings for neural real-time slam,ŌĆØ in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 13 293ŌĆō13 302.
[16] T. Deng, G. Shen, T. Qin, J. Wang, W. Zhao, J. Wang, D. Wang, and
W. Chen, ŌĆ£Plgslam: Progressive neural scene represenation with
local to global bundle adjustment,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09866,
2023.
[17] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk┬©uhler, and G. Drettakis, ŌĆ£3d
gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,ŌĆØ ACM
Transactions on Graphics, vol. 42, no. 4, 2023.
[18] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, ŌĆ£Splatam: Splat, track & map 3d
gaussians for dense rgb-d slam,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.02126,
2023.
[19] C. Yan, D. Qu, D. Wang, D. Xu, Z. Wang, B. Zhao, and X. Li, ŌĆ£Gs-
slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaussian splatting,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.11700, 2023.
[20] V. Yugay, Y. Li, T. Gevers, and M. R. Oswald, ŌĆ£Gaussian-slam:
Photo-realistic dense slam with gaussian splatting,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10070, 2023.
[21] H. Matsuki, R. Murai, P. H. Kelly, and A. J. Davison, ŌĆ£Gaussian
splatting slam,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.06741, 2023.
[22] S. Izadi, D. Kim, O. Hilliges, D. Molyneaux, R. Newcombe,
P. Kohli, J. Shotton, S. Hodges, D. Freeman, A. Davison et al.,
ŌĆ£Kinectfusion: real-time 3d reconstruction and interaction using
a moving depth camera,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the 24th annual ACM
symposium on User interface software and technology, 2011, pp. 559ŌĆō
568.
[23] Z. Teed and J. Deng, ŌĆ£Droid-slam: Deep visual slam for monocular,
stereo, and rgb-d cameras,ŌĆØ Advances in neural information process-
ing systems, vol. 34, pp. 16 558ŌĆō16 569, 2021.
[24] Z. Teed and J. Deng, ŌĆ£Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms
for optical flow,ŌĆØ in Computer VisionŌĆōECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23ŌĆō28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 16.
Springer, 2020, pp. 402ŌĆō419.
[25] M. Bloesch, J. Czarnowski, R. Clark, S. Leutenegger, and A. J. Davi-
son, ŌĆ£Codeslam ŌĆö learning a compact, optimisable representation
for dense visual slam,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2018.
[26] Z. Teed, L. Lipson, and J. Deng, ŌĆ£Deep patch visual odometry,ŌĆØ
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[27] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ra-
mamoorthi, and R. Ng, ŌĆ£Nerf: Representing scenes as neural
radiance fields for view synthesis,ŌĆØ in ECCV, 2020.
[28] X. Yang, H. Li, H. Zhai, Y. Ming, Y. Liu, and G. Zhang, ŌĆ£Vox-fusion:
Dense tracking and mapping with voxel-based neural implicit
representation,ŌĆØ in 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2022, pp. 499ŌĆō507.
[29] E. Sandstr┬©om, Y. Li, L. Van Gool, and M. R. Oswald, ŌĆ£Point-
slam: Dense neural point cloud-based slam,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the

<!-- page 13 -->
13
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp.
18 433ŌĆō18 444.
[30] J. C. Lee, D. Rho, X. Sun, J. H. Ko, and E. Park, ŌĆ£Compact
3d gaussian representation for radiance field,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.13681, 2023.
[31] W. Morgenstern, F. Barthel, A. Hilsmann, and P. Eisert, ŌĆ£Compact
3d scene representation via self-organizing gaussian grids,ŌĆØ arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.13299, 2023.
[32] Z. Fan, K. Wang, K. Wen, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, and Z. Wang, ŌĆ£Lightgaus-
sian: Unbounded 3d gaussian compression with 15x reduction and
200+ fps,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.17245, 2023.
[33] Y. Bengio, N. L┬┤eonard, and A. Courville, ŌĆ£Estimating or propagat-
ing gradients through stochastic neurons for conditional compu-
tation,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint arXiv:1308.3432, 2013.
[34] N.
Zeghidour,
A.
Luebs,
A.
Omran,
J.
Skoglund,
and
M. Tagliasacchi, ŌĆ£Soundstream: An end-to-end neural audio
codec,ŌĆØ IEEE/ACM Transactions on Audio, Speech, and Language
Processing, vol. 30, pp. 495ŌĆō507, 2021.
[35] A. D┬┤efossez, J. Copet, G. Synnaeve, and Y. Adi, ŌĆ£High fidelity
neural audio compression,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13438, 2022.
[36] J. Straub, T. Whelan, L. Ma, Y. Chen, E. Wijmans, S. Green, J. J.
Engel, R. Mur-Artal, C. Ren, S. Verma et al., ŌĆ£The replica dataset:
A digital replica of indoor spaces,ŌĆØ arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797,
2019.
[37] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and
M. Niessner, ŌĆ£Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of
indoor scenes,ŌĆØ in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017.
[38] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cremers,
ŌĆ£A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems,ŌĆØ in 2012
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
2012, pp. 573ŌĆō580.
