<!-- page 1 -->
From Perfect to Noisy World Simulation:
Customizable Embodied Multi-modal Perturbations
for SLAM Robustness Benchmarking
Xiaohao Xu1, Tianyi Zhang2, Sibo Wang1, Xiang Li2, Yongqi Chen1, Ye Li1,
Bhiksha Raj2, Matthew Johnson-Roberson2, Xiaonan Huang1
1 University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, 2 Carnegie Mellon University
Abstract
Embodied agents require robust navigation systems to operate in unstructured
environments, making the robustness of Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) models critical to embodied agent autonomy. While real-world datasets
are invaluable, simulation-based benchmarks offer a scalable approach for robust-
ness evaluations. However, the creation of a challenging and controllable noisy
world with diverse perturbations remains under-explored. To this end, we propose
a novel, customizable pipeline for noisy data synthesis, aimed at assessing the re-
silience of multi-modal SLAM models against various perturbations. The pipeline
comprises a comprehensive taxonomy of sensor and motion perturbations for em-
bodied multi-modal (specifically RGB-D) sensing, categorized by their sources and
propagation order, allowing for procedural composition. We also provide a toolbox
for synthesizing these perturbations, enabling the transformation of clean environ-
ments into challenging noisy simulations. Utilizing the pipeline, we instantiate the
large-scale Noisy-Replica benchmark, which includes diverse perturbation types,
to evaluate the risk tolerance of existing advanced RGB-D SLAM models. Our
extensive analysis uncovers the susceptibilities of both neural (NeRF and Gaus-
sian Splatting -based) and non-neural SLAM models to disturbances, despite their
demonstrated accuracy in standard benchmarks. Our code is publicly available at
https://github.com/Xiaohao-Xu/SLAM-under-Perturbation.
1
Introduction
The growing prevalence of embodied agents deployed in complex and dynamic environments [1,
2], i.e., Noisy World, underscores the critical need for robustness in embodied systems. This
robustness, essential for effective operation, is significantly influenced by the agent’s ability to
withstand perturbations. Consequently, robustness evaluation in such settings [3] has emerged as a
critical research area. For embodied agents, Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [4, 5]
is a fundamental task to achieving autonomy. Therefore, our focus is on developing a comprehensive
and reliable benchmark to assess SLAM robustness against disturbances.
Recent advances in embodied SLAM system assessment have primarily focused on collecting
challenging datasets. These datasets expose SLAM systems to domain-specific environmental
degradation, broadening our understanding of real-world operational challenges [6–19]. However,
due to the inherent difficulties in data collection and labeling in the wild, existing real-world datasets
remain limited in size, hindering holistic evaluation. To overcome these limitations, simulation-based
Preprint. Under review.
arXiv:2406.16850v1  [cs.CV]  24 Jun 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
Render 
Physics 
Engine
Trajectory of 
Robot Center
Controller 
…
Trajectory 
of Each Sensor
Robot System
Clean Sensor
Streams
SLAM 
Model
Perturbed Sensor
Streams
…
…
Performance
Evaluation
Trajectory 
Perturbation
Composer
Sensor 
Perturbation
Composer
Basic modules for procedural SLAM data generation and evaluation.
Perturbation synthesis to enable SLAM evaluation under perturbation.
3D Scene 
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
(e)
(f)
Config. of Each Sensor
Figure 1: Noisy data synthesis for robustness evaluation of embodied perception (specifically
SLAM) models under perturbations. Our insight is to customize perturbations (red blocks) during
conventional procedural (clean) data generation (blue blocks).
Table 1: Comparison on synthetic visual SLAM benchmarks.
Benchmark
#Seq Modality
#Perturbed
Setting
Multi-modal
Perturbation
Perturbation Category
Editable
Capability
RGB Motion Depth RGB-D Sync.
Replica [26]
8 RGB-D
0
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
TartanAir [27]
30 RGB
8
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
Noisy-Replica (Ours)
1,000 RGB-D
124
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
benchmarks [3, 20–23] have emerged as a promising approach. They offer the advantage of creating
infinite and diverse scenarios for rigorous testing of SLAM models. Additionally, these benchmarks
allow for the adaptive crafting of increasingly challenging environments, driving the continuous
improvement of SLAM robustness [22]. Simulated methods also enable the study of the disentangled
effects of individual perturbations on SLAM performance, revealing potential weaknesses. While
current simulators may not fully replicate real-world fidelity, rapid advancements in visual content
synthesis [24, 25] are progressively closing this gap.
Despite the increasing availability of nearly photo-realistic 3D scene datasets and simulators for
SLAM evaluation [26, 28–30], they often lack varied and controllable disturbances. Consequently,
these simulations typically represent idealized, perturbation-free environments (Perfect World),
leaving the simulated perturbed environment (Noisy World) largely unexplored. To address this
gap, we propose a comprehensive perturbation taxonomy for embodied multi-modal (specifically
RGB-D) sensing systems. This taxonomy includes perturbations originating from RGB-D sensing
(RGB imaging and depth imaging corruptions), locomotion of the embodied agent (motion-related
deviations), and communication among multiple sensors (multi-sensor de-synchronization). We
illustrate how these perturbations propagate within the system, enabling the composition of mixed
perturbations. Based on this taxonomy, we develop a perturbation composition toolbox that seamlessly
integrates with existing simulation tools [31, 29, 26], transforming the simulated environment from a
Perfect World into a more challenging Noisy World for robustness evaluation. As shown in Fig. 1,
we propose a noisy data synthesis pipeline, designed to assess SLAM resilience under customizable
perturbations. This pipeline adapts to different hardware configurations (e.g., sensor placement) and
software components (e.g., SLAM models), incorporating both motion and sensor perturbations with
varying severity levels to simulate sensor pose vibrations and environmental disturbances.
To assess SLAM robustness, we use the proposed comprehensive taxonomy of perturbations and noisy
data synthesis pipeline to instantiate the Noisy-Replica benchmark, based on photo-realistic 3D scenes
from the Replica [26] dataset. As shown in Table 1, Noisy-Replica surpasses existing benchmarks
in diversity and scope. It offers editable perturbation capabilities covering 124 distinct RGB-D
perturbation settings across 1,000 long video sequences, which is two orders of magnitude larger
than standard SLAM benchmarks [26, 12]. We then analyze the effects of individual perturbations on
both neural (using NeRF [32] or Gaussian Splat [33] map representations) and non-neural SLAM
models. Our findings reveal that while advanced SLAM models excel in standard clean SLAM
2

<!-- page 3 -->
benchmarks [12, 26], they exhibit vulnerabilities and a propensity for failure when exposed to
perturbations. Furthermore, we demonstrate that combined perturbations pose greater challenges for
SLAM systems, and the interaction of multiple perturbation types can create complex impacts.
To summarize, our contributions are: 1) We propose a comprehensive taxonomy of perturbations for
embodied multi-modal (specifically RGB-D) sensing systems, along with a perturbation synthesis
toolbox. 2) We introduce a noisy data synthesis pipeline for customizable robustness assessment.
Focusing on the SLAM task, we utilize this pipeline to initialize the first large-scale RGB-D SLAM
robustness benchmark, Noisy-Replica, featuring diverse editable sensor and motion perturbations. 3)
To the best of our knowledge, we conduct the first robustness study of neural RGB-D SLAM models
under perturbations. Our extensive dataset and robustness benchmarking offer a systematic approach
and environment to evaluate SLAM models, revealing the vulnerabilities of both existing neural and
non-neural SLAM models to individual and combined perturbations.
2
Related Work
Robustness benchmarking. To ensure the reliable deployment of mobile robots, their perception
modules must demonstrate resilience to shifts in natural distributions [34, 35]. A pioneering ro-
bustness benchmark [36] analyzes image corruption robustness by evaluating the performance of
image classification methods against common corruptions and perturbations. Building upon this,
subsequent research has expanded the scope of investigation to encompass other perception tasks.
These tasks include 2D/3D object detection [37–40], segmentation [41–43], and embodied navigation
[3, 44]. These studies underscore the significance of evaluating models’ robustness to corruptions.
In SLAM, the challenges extend beyond just handling image-level corruptions, like those due to
camera malfunctions. It is also crucial to account for dynamic variations in sensor corruption and
deviations in sensor transformation simultaneously over time. These variations arise from time-variant
environmental effects and the diverse motion of robots, respectively. In this study, we propose a
perturbation taxonomy for RGB-D SLAM in dynamic (e.g., varying illumination) and unstructured
environments (e.g., uneven terrains that can cause vibrations for mobile robots).
SLAM methods. This overview highlights visual-related SLAM systems. More comprehensive
reviews of SLAM systems can be obtained from various resources such as [4, 45, 46]. Classical single-
modal SLAM methods, like visual-only models exemplified by ORB-SLAM [47], have demonstrated
remarkable accuracy in ‘clean’ benchmark settings [18, 26]. To address the complexities of real-
world environments, researchers have explored various techniques [48–51] that incorporate multi-
view sensors and fuse diverse modalities, such as visual-inertia and RGB-D. Furthermore, several
approaches [52, 22, 53–56, 32] have utilized neural networks and neural representations to enhance
generalization and improve the dense mapping quality. Despite notable improvements in accuracy,
the robustness of these models against perturbations remains under-explored.
Robustness evaluation for SLAM. The robustness of SLAM systems is essential for their reliable and
accurate operation in dynamic and challenging real-world environments [4]. This robustness is critical
not only to handle sensor faults, but also to ensure long-term performance. To facilitate the robustness
evaluation of SLAM models, several datasets [18, 16, 17, 2, 57] have been collected in degraded
environments with perturbations such as low illumination or motion blur. Furthermore, SLAMBench
[58] compares the performance of several classical SLAM models across multiple challenging
datasets and reveals the vulnerability of these SLAM models. Considering that constructing real-
world datasets via robot platforms for SLAM can be challenging and unscalable, Wang et al. [27] have
utilized photo-realistic simulation environments to create a pioneering simulated SLAM benchmark
called TartanAir for robustness evaluation. In this study, we expand the scope of evaluation to include
the robustness of multi-modal SLAM models—encompassing both classical and neural SLAM
methods—against a broader spectrum of sensor corruptions and motion patterns (e.g., varying speed
and motion-induced deviations of sensors’ trajectories).
3

<!-- page 4 -->
Gaussian
Noise
RGB Image (for reference)
Clean Depth Map
Random 
Missing
Edge 
Erosion
Range Clipping
Dark red regions in are masked out or out of  range.
0
∞
Min Depth
Max Depth
Clean depth map.
Defocus Blur
Gaussian Blur
Glass Blur
Motion Blur
Gaussian Noise
Shot Noise
Impulse Noise
Speckle Noise
Fog Effect
Frost Effect
Spatter Effect
Snow Effect
Brightness
Contrast
Pixelate
JPEG Compression
Observation
Pixel
Clean 3D Pose
for Each Sensor
Translation 
Deviation
Rotation
Deviation
Faster Motion
t
t+1
t+2
t
t+1
t+2
t
t+1
t+2
t
t+1
1
RGB
Sensor
Depth
Sensor
t
t+1
t+2
t+3
t
t+1
t+2
t+3
1
2
RGB
Sensor
Depth
Sensor
t
t+1
t+2
t+3
t
t+1
t+2
Synchronized
Desynchronized
(a) Sensor Poses
(b) Imaging of RGB Sensor
(c) Imaging of Depth Sensor
(d) Sensor Synchronisation
Source and Propagation Order of Perturbations for RGBD Sensing
Not Observed
Clean RGB
Sensor Stream
Perturbed
Sensor Stream
Perturbed
Sensor Stream
Perturbed
Sensor Stream
2
Environmental 
Interference 
Lens Distortions 
(specifically Blur)
Sensor 
Noises
Post-
processing
Figure 2: Taxonomy of perturbations for embodied RGB-D sensing. The sources of perturbations
include: (a) sensor pose errors, (b) RGB and (c) depth imaging corruptions, and (d) RGB-D sensor
synchronization errors. Dashed arrows illustrate the propagation order of individual perturbations.
3
Formulation of SLAM under Perturbations
SLAM aims to concurrently construct a map of the environment and estimate the pose (position and
orientation) of an embodied agent [59]. Given a sequence of observations z1:t from timestamp 1 to t,
the goal is to estimate the environmental map m (e.g., 3D mesh or point cloud) and the trajectory x1:t
over time. The agent’s pose at a specific timestamp i (1 ≤i ≤t) is denoted by spatial coordinates
and orientation. The probabilistic posterior articulates our belief about the map and trajectory based
on the observations which encodes the effect of ego motions:
p(m, x1:t|z1:t)
(1)
where xt = [Rt, tt] with Rt ∈SO(3) being a rotation matrix and tt ∈R3 a translation vector for
each timestamp t.
4

<!-- page 5 -->
For embodied agents, perturbations can arise from three main sources: sensor imaging, motion,
and communication. 1) Imaging perturbations refer to noise and processing effects introduced to
sensor readings. 2) Motion perturbations result from locomotion complexities (e.g., vibrations) and
agility (e.g., fast and dynamic movements), leading to complex sensor pose sequences and unstable
observations. 3) Communication perturbations can cause de-synchronization of multiple sensors.
4
Noisy Data Synthesis with Customizable Perturbations
4.1
Noisy Data Synthesis Pipeline
Fig. 1 shows the proposed noisy data synthesis pipeline for model robustness benchmarking of
embodied RGB-D sensing systems. The pipeline is highly customizable and incorporates controllable
perturbations to simulate sensor noises and locomotion disturbances.
The initial phase is to configure the robot system, the desired trajectory of the robot center (e.g.,
the center of gravity) in the world frame, and the 3D scene (see Fig. 1a). We can optionally utilize
off-the-shelf physics engines (such as MuJoCo [60]) in conjunction with motion controllers to obtain
the trajectory (i.e., sensor poses along time) of each individual sensor in the world frame (see Fig. 1b).
Subsequently, these sensor-specific trajectories are passed to the trajectory perturbation composer
to introduce motion deviations to the pose, thereby better emulating vibrations of sensors on a
mobile robot (see Fig. 1c). The render, implemented via OpenGL [61], derives clean sensor data
streams conditional on the trajectory and sensor configurations (see Fig. 1d). Sensor imaging and
synchronization perturbations are introduced into the sensor streams to mimic real-world observational
anomalies and sensor failures (see Fig. 1e). By utilizing the generated noisy data, which encompasses
perturbed sensor streams as inputs and perturbed trajectory and 3D scene as ground-truth labels, the
robustness of SLAM models to perturbations can be rigorously assessed (see Fig. 1f).
4.2
Perturbation Taxonomy for Embodied RGB-D Sensing
Perturbation sources. As shown in Fig. 2, perturbations affecting embodied RGB-D sensing systems
can originate from sensor pose deviations, inaccuracies within the RGB-D imaging processes, and
de-synchronization issues between RGB and depth sensors. Due to space limitation, we briefly
illustrate perturbation sources as follows. Please see Appendix Sec. B for details.
(a) Perturbation on sensor poses. Fig. 2a depicts perturbations affecting sensor poses, encompassing
Motion/Trajectory Deviations (by applying a rotation perturbation ∆R ∈SO(3) and a translation
perturbation ∆t ∈R3) and Faster Motion Effect (by downsampling the original sensor stream).
(b) Perturbation on RGB sensor imaging. The perturbations on RGB imaging are designed to
model potential error sources throughout the entire RGB image formation and processing pipeline,
from the 3D world to the final 2D image. The perturbation sources include environmental interference
effects that affect light transmission, blurring effects partially caused by lens-related distortions,
sensor noises, and post-processing effects on the image. Prominent perturbations [36] (see Fig. 2b)
that we considered are: 1) environmental interference: Snow Effect, Frost Effect, Fog Effect, and
Spatter effect; 2) lens-related distortions (specifically blur): Gaussian Blur, Glass Blur, Motion Blur,
and Defocus Blur; 3) sensor Noises: Gaussian Noise, Shot Noise, Impulse Noise, and Speckle Noise;
4) post-processing: Brightness Increase, Contrast Decrease, JPEG Compression, and Pixelate.
(c) Perturbation on depth sensor imaging The depth distribution of the existing simulated bench-
mark Replica [26] differs noticeably from real data TUM-RGBD [18] (see Appendix Sec. B.3), which
motivates us to propose a set of perturbation operations designed specifically for depth images (see
Fig. 2c): 1) noise-rated perturbation: Gaussian Noise; 2) depth missing: Edge Erosion and Random
Missing Depth; 3) depth perception limitation: Range Clipping.
(d) Perturbation on RGB-D sensor synchronization. To emulate sensor delays in cases where
multiple sensors within an RGB-D sensing system are not synchronized, we introduce temporal
misalignment between the sensor streams (see Fig. 2d).
5

<!-- page 6 -->
Table 2: Performance (measured by ATE↓(m)) under static (Top) and dynamic (Bottom) RGB
imaging perturbations for Neural SLAM models. Cells with darker shades indicate higher ATE.
Method
Clean
Perturbed
Blur Effect
Noise Effect
Environmental Interference
Post-processing
Mean
Max Motion Defocus Gaussian Glass Gaussian Shot Impulse Speckle
Fog
Frost
Snow Spatter Bright Contra. Jpeg Pixelate
GO-SLAM (Mono) [56]
0.0039 0.0903 0.7207 0.0151 0.0052
0.0052
0.0089
0.0776
0.0456 0.0296
0.0190 0.2157 0.7207 0.1921 0.0859 0.0046 0.0047 0.0095 0.0046
iMAP (RGB-D) [54]
0.1209 0.1568 0.3831 0.1424 0.1671
0.1811
0.0672
0.0278
0.0779 0.1710
0.1087 0.1913 0.1316 0.1665 0.1473 0.1903 0.3831 0.1884 0.1669
Nice-SLAM (RGB-D) [55] 0.0147 0.0253 0.0654 0.0307 0.0151
0.0161
0.0188
0.0254
0.0377 0.0353
0.0151 0.0186 0.0160 0.0323 0.0320 0.0654 0.0161 0.0150 0.0145
CO-SLAM (RGB-D) [53] 0.0090 0.0104 0.0125 0.0115 0.0096
0.0097
0.0097
0.0125
0.0101 0.0099
0.0105 0.0118 0.0113 0.0104 0.0098 0.0103 0.0112 0.0094 0.0094
GO-SLAM (RGB-D) [56] 0.0046 0.0574 0.6271 0.0135 0.0052
0.0052
0.0090
0.0169
0.0140 0.0171
0.0100 0.1211 0.6271 0.0416 0.0164 0.0047 0.0054 0.0065 0.0050
SplaTAM-S (RGB-D) [62] 0.0045 0.0062 0.0160 0.0160 0.0052
0.0049
0.0048
0.0054
0.0050 0.0044
0.0051 0.0085 0.0063 0.0048 0.0051 0.0038 0.0133 0.0044 0.0048
Optimal performance (min ATE) achieved by using all SLAM models:
min ATE
0.0039
0.0056 0.0115 0.0115 0.0052
0.0049
0.0048
0.0054
0.0050 0.0044
0.0051 0.0085 0.0063 0.0048 0.0051 0.0038 0.0054 0.0044 0.0046
mean(min ATE)
0.0056 0.0066
0.0066
0.0050
0.0062
0.0046
GO-SLAM (Mono) [56]
0.0039 0.0933 0.7395 0.0155 0.0065
0.0060
0.0090
0.0509
0.0253 0.0396
0.0158 0.2668 0.7395 0.2254 0.0474 0.0066 0.0050 0.0298 0.0044
iMAP (RGB-D) [54]
0.1209 0.1756 0.2873 0.1243 0.1042
0.2149
0.1221
0.1354
0.1170 0.1967
0.1576 0.2279 0.2873 0.2412 0.1528 0.2141 0.2576 0.1607 0.0955
Nice-SLAM (RGB-D) [55] 0.0147 0.0214 0.0409 0.0157 0.0252
0.0359
0.0211
0.0288
0.0409 0.0146
0.0155 0.0167 0.0211 0.0197 0.0187 0.0206 0.0155 0.0146 0.0170
CO-SLAM (RGB-D) [53] 0.0090 0.0105 0.0117 0.0107 0.0095
0.0115
0.0093
0.0106
0.0103 0.0102
0.0098 0.0117 0.0116 0.0111 0.0109 0.0106 0.0111 0.0095 0.0097
GO-SLAM (RGB-D) [56] 0.0046 0.0363 0.2213 0.0130 0.0057
0.0055
0.0078
0.0185
0.0117 0.0139
0.0098 0.1685 0.2213 0.0637 0.0166 0.0051 0.0052 0.0092 0.0049
SplaTAM-S (RGB-D) [62] 0.0045 0.008
0.045
0.0191 0.0053
0.0052
0.0050
0.0058
0.0072 0.0044
0.0067 0.0062 0.0062 0.045
0.0041 0.0054 0.0096 0.0046 0.0045
Optimal performance (min ATE) achieved by using all SLAM models:
min ATE
0.0039
0.0061 0.0111 0.0107 0.0053
0.0052
0.0050
0.0058
0.0072 0.0044
0.0067 0.0062 0.0062 0.0111 0.0041 0.0051 0.0050 0.0046 0.0044
mean(min ATE)
0.0061 0.0069
0.0066
0.0060
0.0069
0.0048
G represent settings that include failure sequences where no final trajectory is generated due to running out of GPU memory (more than 48GB).
The number in front of G represents the average ATE as failure sequences are set as a value of 1.0.
Perturbation propagation order. Within a embodied RGB-D sensing system, the order (dashed
arrows of Fig. 2) in which perturbations occur and interact follows the sensing and data processing
procedure. Initially, sensor motion deviations directly impact the accuracy of estimated sensor
poses, creating a ripple effect downstream. Subsequently, external noises introduced during the RGB
and depth imaging process further corrupt the data, compounding the initial pose errors. Finally,
desynchronization between multiple sensor streams can lead to misalignment during data fusion.
Perturbation mode and severity. Perturbations are examined in two modes: static and dynamic.
Static perturbations maintain a constant severity throughout a sensor stream or a pose sequence, while
dynamic perturbations exhibit frame-to-frame variations, mimicking time-variant perturbations. In
addition, the perturbation is investigated on different levels of severity and strength.
5
Benchmarking RGB-D SLAM Robustness under Perturbations
Leveraging our noisy data synthesis pipeline, we instantiate Noisy-Replica, a benchmark designed
for robustness evaluation of RGB-D SLAM models under perturbations. In the following sections,
we delve into the details of Noisy-Replica benchmark and evaluate the performance of neural and
non-neural RGB-D SLAM models under perturbation.
5.1
Noisy-Replica Benchmark Construction
Data source for rendering. We render the RGB-D sensor streams using 3D scene models sourced
from the Replica dataset [26], which comprises real 3D scans of indoor scenes. We select the same
set of eight rooms and offices as the (clean) Replica-SLAM dataset [54] for consistent comparison.
Each sequence has 2,000 frames at 1200×680 resolution. See Appendix Sec. C.1 for details on the
assumptions used for benchmark instantiation.
Perturbation setup. We compose a diverse set of RGB-D perturbations using our noisy data synthesis
pipeline. When motion deviations is disabled, we utilize the same trajectory as [54] to render clean
sensor streams, and then introduce perturbations for each frame. 1) For RGB perturbations, we
follow the perturbation magnitudes used in image classification robustness benchmark [36]. 2)
For the severity of depth perturbations, we refer to the depth range and distribution in real-world
dataset TUM-RGBD [18]. 3) For motion deviations, we perturb the original trajectories in [54] by
introducing additional translation and orientation deviations in sensor poses. 4) To simulate faster
motion, we down-sample sensor streams from the clean source by 2, 4, and 8 times. 5) To mimic
sensor de-synchronization, we introduce frame delay (5, 10, and 20 frames) between RGB and depth
sensor streams. See Appendix Sec. C.2 for details about benchmark statistics.
6

<!-- page 7 -->
(b) Motion Deviations on  Sensor Pose
(a) Perturbations on  Depth Imaging
(d) Perturbations on  Sensor Synchronization
(c) Faster Motion Effect
Translation Deviation
Rotation Deviation
Figure 3: Performance (measured by ATE↓(m)) of Neural SLAM models under diverse perturbations.
For visualization, sequences resulting in failure are assigned an ATE value of 1.0.
Benchmarking baseline models. While previous SLAM robustness evaluations primarily focus on
classical SLAM methods [27, 58] (e.g., ORB-SLAM3 [49]), our benchmark additionally encompasses
top-performing Neural SLAM models on standard SLAM benchmarks for robustness benchmarking
analyses, including iMAP [54], Nice-SLAM [55], CO-SLAM [53], GO-SLAM [56], and SplaTAM-S
[62]. See Appendix Sec. C.3 for more details about baseline models.
Evaluation metrics. We primarily use Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) [63] for evaluation. For
classical SLAM models, we also use Relative Pose Error (RPE) and Success Rate (SR) [49, 27]
metrics. Smaller ATE and RPE values (↓) and larger SR values (↑) indicate better performance.
5.2
Benchmarking Results on Isolated Perturbations
This section summarizes the findings on the Noisy-Replica benchmark, evaluating the robustness of
RGB-D SLAM models against various perturbations. To reduce randomness, each experiment is
conducted three times on eight 3D scenes, averaging the results across 24 experiments per perturbation.
Detailed benchmarking tables are available in Appendix Sec. K.
Sensor perturbation on RGB imaging. We present the performance of Neural SLAM models and
the classical SLAM model ORB-SLAM3 under RGB imaging perturbations in Table 2 and Fig. 4a,
respectively. For Neural SLAM models, to gauge the expected average and worst-case performance
of each model, we present the mean and maximum ATE values across various perturbation settings.
We offer the following analyses and insights: 1) Different types of RGB imaging perturbations
impact SLAM performance to varying degrees, with environmental effects like adverse weather
conditions posing the most significant challenge, followed by sensor noises, while post-processing
perturbations like image compression have a relatively minor influence. 2) Dynamic perturbations
consistently present a greater challenge than static perturbations for SLAM systems, evident in both
individual model performance and the optimal performance achievable by all SLAM models. The
performance decline under dynamic perturbations underscores the difficulty of handling real-time
7

<!-- page 8 -->
(a) Perturbations on  RGB Imaging
(b) Motion Deviations on Sensor Pose
(c) Perturbations on  Depth Imaging
(e) Perturbations on  Sensor Synchronization
(d) Faster Motion Effect
Translation Deviation
Rotation Deviation
Figure 4: Performance (measured by ATE↓(m), RPE↓(m), and SR↑) of ORB-SLAM3 [49] under
diverse perturbations. For visualization, sequences resulting in failure are assigned an ATE/RPE
value of 1.0 and a Success Rate of 0.
visual disturbances. 3) Neural SLAM models exhibit robustness to most noise types due to their
learning-based components. In contrast, the non-neural model ORB-SLAM3 encounters complete
tracking loss under certain perturbations, resulting in a low success rate of pose tracking.
Sensor perturbation on depth imaging. Fig. 3a and Fig. 4c demonstrate the impact of depth
perturbations on Neural SLAM models and the ORB-SLAM3 model, respectively. 1) Most neural-
based SLAM models exhibit minimal performance degradation when faced with partial depth missing
perturbations (e.g., random missing values, edge erosion, and range clipping). This robustness can be
attributed to their effective pixel-wise optimization mechanisms. In contrast, ORB-SLAM3 suffers
significant tracking loss and experiences a notable decline in trajectory estimation performance
when encountering missing depth data. 2) Introducing Gaussian noise to depth maps has a more
pronounced impact on all evaluated models compared to missing data. This results in a considerable
increase in trajectory estimation error, due to the noise directly interfering with the observed depth.
Motion deviations on sensor poses. As shown in Fig. 3b and Fig. 4b, motion deviations, both in
translation and rotation, of sensor poses significantly degrade the trajectory estimation accuracy of
SLAM models, even with small deviations like 2.5 cm in translation or 3 degrees in rotation. The
combination of translation and rotation deviations amplifies the trajectory estimation error, leading to
failure of nearly all SLAM models. SplaTAM-S, which exhibits robustness under sensor imaging
perturbations, faces failures in most settings under motion deviations. ORB-SLAM3 and GO-SLAM
demonstrate better robustness to motion deviations, likely due to their incorporation of loop closure
and global bundle adjustment techniques. Overall, trajectory estimation accuracy in advanced SLAM
models is highly sensitive to motion deviations of sensor poses.
Faster motion effect. Fig. 3c and Fig. 4d demonstrate the impact of faster motion effects on
Neural SLAM models and ORB-SLAM3, revealing the limitations of most approaches in achieving
acceptable performance at higher speeds. Notably, GO-SLAM excels in handling faster motion
8

<!-- page 9 -->
scenarios, thanks to the integration of global bundle adjustment mechanism. Besides, the classical
SLAM model ORB-SLAM3 also demonstrates robustness in tackling high-speed scenarios.
Perturbation on sensor synchronization. Fig. 3d and Fig. 4e present the result under different
severity levels of multi-sensor misalignment, characterized by the frame interval (∆) between RGB
and depth sensor streams. The performance of iMAP and Nice-SLAM significantly deteriorates as the
misalignment intervals increase. In contrast, CO-SLAM, GO-SLAM, and SplaTAM-S demonstrate a
certain degree of tolerance towards misalignment. Generally, increasing de-synchronization frames
leads to larger performance drop.
Discussion on the effect of isolated perturbations. Our main takeaways are: 1) No single model
can handle all perturbed settings. Different SLAM models demonstrate varying robustness across
different types of perturbations, emphasizing the need for tailored approaches for specific scenarios
and application requirements. 2) There is a lack of correlation between a model’s performance in clean
and perturbed settings. Methods that excel in standard clean conditions may exhibit significantly
degraded performance under specific perturbations. These findings underscore the importance
of evaluating SLAM systems across diverse perturbed settings, in addition to clean settings, to
comprehensively and reliably assess their robustness.
5.3
Case Study on the Effect of Mixed Perturbations
Table 3: Effect of mixed perturbations on ATE↓(m).
Cells with darker shades indicate higher ATE.
Perturbation Type
Clean
Perturbation Composition
RGB Snow Effect
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
RGB Motion Blur
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
RGB Gaussian Noise
✓
✓
✓
✓
RGB JPEG Compress.
✓
✓
✓
Depth Gaussian Noise
✓
✓
RGBD De-sync.
✓
GO-SLAM [56]
0.005 0.056 0.139 0.196 0.127 0.211 0.327
SplaTAM-S [62]
0.005 0.005 0.007 0.008 0.008 0.132 0.307
We conduct a case study to investigate the im-
pact of mixed perturbations, combining decou-
pled perturbations based on their propagation
order (see Fig. 2) in SLAM systems, using
medium-severity static perturbations, as show-
cased in Table 3. Our key observations are: 1)
Certain combinations of mixed perturbations
can degrade performance more than individual
perturbations alone, as seen in the example of
Snow Effect and Motion Blur leading to higher
trajectory estimation error for the GO-SLAM
model. 2) However, mixing multiple perturbations does not always worsen performance, as in the
case of JPEG Compression slightly reducing trajectory estimation error for GO-SLAM. The overall
performance under mixed perturbations depends on the complex interplay of various perturbations.
6
Conclusion and Future Work
Conclusion. In this work, we first presented a comprehensive taxonomy of perturbations for embodied
RGB-D sensing system and introduced a versatile noisy data synthesis pipeline, which can be utilized
to transform perturbation-free scenes, i.e., Perfect World, into customizable perturbed datasets, i.e.,
Noisy World, laying the ground work for rigorous robustness benchmarking. Then, we created
the Noisy-Replica benchmark – an extensive initiative designed to assess the resilience of RGB-D
SLAM models against a wide range of perturbations. Our evaluation has revealed vulnerabilities in
current SLAM systems when exposed to various perturbations. These findings not only highlight the
limitations of existing models and their potential failures in real-world, unstructured environments,
but also offer valuable insights for future research aimed at developing robust embodied agents.
Limitations and future work. While this work provides a preliminary robustness analysis of SLAM
for embodied RGB-D system, revealing the fragility, our work has several limitations that future
research could address. 1) For perturbation synthesis, leveraging generative models like [64] could
enhance the quality and realism of testing environments. Additionally, exploring more types of
perturbations, such as regional sensor corruptions [65] and adversarial perturbations [66], would be
valuable. 2) For robustness evaluation, future studies could investigate the complex interplay between
multiple perturbations and evaluate model robustness under more diverse coupled noises. Further
9

<!-- page 10 -->
research could also assess the robustness of more diverse SLAM models, including those using
voxel representation [67, 68], and additional modalities (e.g., IMU [51] and LiDAR [69]). Exploring
the robustness of active SLAM [70] and multi-agent SLAM [71] represents an exciting frontier.
3) Beyond robustness benchmarking, future work could explore model robustness enhancement,
with techniques like sensor correction [72] and calibration [73, 74]. Additional future directions for
exploration are provided in Appendix Sec. F.
Acknowledgments and Disclosure of Funding
This work is partially supported by Office of Naval Research (Grant #: N00014-24-1-2137; Program
Manager: Michael “Q” Qin). The authors appreciate partial GPU resources provided by Prof. Ram
Vasudevan from UMich Robotics. The authors are grateful to Dr. Lu Li from CMU, Prof. Siheng
Chen from SJTU, Dr. Wenshan Wang from CMU, and Dr. Youmin Zhang from University of Bologna
for valuable discussions. The authors express their gratitude to Prof. Sara Nezami Nav, Prof. Pamela
Bogart, Mrs. Lucy Kates, and Mr. Todd Maslyk from UMich ELI for proofreading.
References
[1] Elia Kaufmann, Leonard Bauersfeld, Antonio Loquercio, Matthias Müller, Vladlen Koltun, and Davide
Scaramuzza. Champion-level drone racing using deep reinforcement learning. Nature, 620(7976):982–987,
2023.
[2] Kamak Ebadi, Lukas Bernreiter, Harel Biggie, Gavin Catt, Yun Chang, Arghya Chatterjee, Christopher E.
Denniston, Simon-Pierre Deschênes, Kyle Harlow, Shehryar Khattak, Lucas Nogueira, Matteo Palieri,
Pavel Petráˇcek, Matˇej Petrlík, Andrzej Reinke, Vít Krátký, Shibo Zhao, Ali-akbar Agha-mohammadi,
Kostas Alexis, Christoffer Heckman, Kasra Khosoussi, Navinda Kottege, Benjamin Morrell, Marco Hutter,
Fred Pauling, François Pomerleau, Martin Saska, Sebastian Scherer, Roland Siegwart, Jason L. Williams,
and Luca Carlone. Present and future of slam in extreme environments: The darpa subt challenge. IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, pages 1–20, 2023.
[3] Prithvijit Chattopadhyay, Judy Hoffman, Roozbeh Mottaghi, and Aniruddha Kembhavi. Robustnav:
Towards benchmarking robustness in embodied navigation. In IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 15691–15700, 2021.
[4] Cesar Cadena, Luca Carlone, Henry Carrillo, Yasir Latif, Davide Scaramuzza, José Neira, Ian Reid,
and John J. Leonard. Past, present, and future of simultaneous localization and mapping: Toward the
robust-perception age. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 32(6):1309–1332, 2016.
[5] Changhao Chen, Bing Wang, Chris Xiaoxuan Lu, Niki Trigoni, and Andrew Markham. Deep learning for
visual localization and mapping: A survey. IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
pages 1–21, 2023.
[6] Will Maddern, Geoffrey Pascoe, Chris Linegar, and Paul Newman. 1 year, 1000 km: The oxford robotcar
dataset. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 36(1):3–15, 2017.
[7] Yukyung Choi, Namil Kim, Soonmin Hwang, Kibaek Park, Jae Shin Yoon, Kyounghwan An, and In So
Kweon. Kaist multi-spectral day/night data set for autonomous and assisted driving. IEEE Transactions on
Intelligent Transportation Systems, 19(3):934–948, 2018.
[8] Michael Burri, Janosch Nikolic, Pascal Gohl, Thomas Schneider, Joern Rehder, Sammy Omari, Markus W
Achtelik, and Roland Siegwart. The EuRoC micro aerial vehicle datasets. The International Journal of
Robotics Research, 2016.
[9] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are we ready for autonomous driving? The KITTI
Vision Benchmark Suite. In Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2012.
[10] Lintong Zhang, Marco Camurri, and Maurice Fallon. Multi-camera lidar inertial extension to the newer
college dataset. arXiv preprint arXiv:2112.08854, 2021.
[11] Bernd Pfrommer, Nitin Sanket, Kostas Daniilidis, and Jonas Cleveland. Penncosyvio: A challenging visual
inertial odometry benchmark. In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pages 3847–3854. IEEE, 2017.
10

<!-- page 11 -->
[12] Jürgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram Burgard, and Daniel Cremers. A benchmark for
the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems, pages 573–580, 2012.
[13] David Zuñiga-Noël, Alberto Jaenal, Ruben Gomez-Ojeda, and Javier Gonzalez-Jimenez. The uma-vi
dataset: Visual–inertial odometry in low-textured and dynamic illumination environments. The Interna-
tional Journal of Robotics Research, 39(9):1052–1060, 2020.
[14] Nicholas Carlevaris-Bianco, Arash K Ushani, and Ryan M Eustice. University of michigan north campus
long-term vision and lidar dataset. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 35(9):1023–1035,
2016.
[15] Jeffrey Delmerico, Titus Cieslewski, Henri Rebecq, Matthias Faessler, and Davide Scaramuzza. Are we
ready for autonomous drone racing? the UZH-FPV drone racing dataset. In IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom.
(ICRA), 2019.
[16] Michael Helmberger, Kristian Morin, Beda Berner, Nitish Kumar, Giovanni Cioffi, and Davide Scaramuzza.
The hilti slam challenge dataset. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(3):7518–7525, 2022.
[17] Yulun Tian, Yun Chang, Long Quang, Arthur Schang, Carlos Nieto-Granda, Jonathan P How, and Luca
Carlone. Resilient and distributed multi-robot visual slam: Datasets, experiments, and lessons learned.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.04362, 2023.
[18] David Schubert, Thore Goll, Nikolaus Demmel, Vladyslav Usenko, Jörg Stückler, and Daniel Cremers.
The tum vi benchmark for evaluating visual-inertial odometry. In 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 1680–1687, 2018.
[19] Shibo Zhao, Yuanjun Gao, Tianhao Wu, Damanpreet Singh, Rushan Jiang, Haoxiang Sun, Mansi Sarawata,
Warren C Whittaker, Ian Higgins, Shaoshu Su, Yi Du, Can Xu, John Keller, Jay Karhade, Lucas Nogueira,
Sourojit Saha, Yuheng Qiu, Ji Zhang, Wenshan Wang, Chen Wang, and Sebastian Scherer. SubT-MRS
dataset: Pushing slam towards all-weather environments. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[20] Thomas Sayre-McCord, Winter Guerra, Amado Antonini, Jasper Arneberg, Austin Brown, Guilherme
Cavalheiro, Yajun Fang, Alex Gorodetsky, Dave McCoy, Sebastian Quilter, Fabian Riether, Ezra Tal, Yunus
Terzioglu, Luca Carlone, and Sertac Karaman. Visual-inertial navigation algorithm development using
photorealistic camera simulation in the loop. In 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 2566–2573, 2018.
[21] Alexey Dosovitskiy, German Ros, Felipe Codevilla, Antonio Lopez, and Vladlen Koltun. Carla: An open
urban driving simulator. In Conference on robot learning, pages 1–16. PMLR, 2017.
[22] Wenshan Wang, Yaoyu Hu, and Sebastian Scherer. Tartanvo: A generalizable learning-based vo. In
Conference on Robot Learning, pages 1761–1772. PMLR, 2021.
[23] Matthew Johnson-Roberson, Charles Barto, Rounak Mehta, Sharath Nittur Sridhar, Karl Rosaen, and Ram
Vasudevan. Driving in the matrix: Can virtual worlds replace human-generated annotations for real world
tasks? In 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 746–753, 2017.
[24] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser, and Björn Ommer. High-resolution
image synthesis with latent diffusion models. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 10684–10695, 2022.
[25] Alexander Raistrick, Lahav Lipson, Zeyu Ma, Lingjie Mei, Mingzhe Wang, Yiming Zuo, Karhan Kayan,
Hongyu Wen, Beining Han, Yihan Wang, et al. Infinite photorealistic worlds using procedural generation.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12630–
12641, 2023.
[26] Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J Engel, Raul
Mur-Artal, Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, et al. The replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019.
[27] Wenshan Wang, Delong Zhu, Xiangwei Wang, Yaoyu Hu, Yuheng Qiu, Chen Wang, Yafei Hu, Ashish
Kapoor, and Sebastian Scherer. Tartanair: A dataset to push the limits of visual slam. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 4909–4916. IEEE, 2020.
[28] Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Halber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner.
Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5828–5839, 2017.
11

<!-- page 12 -->
[29] Matt Deitke, Eli VanderBilt, Alvaro Herrasti, Luca Weihs, Kiana Ehsani, Jordi Salvador, Winson Han, Eric
Kolve, Aniruddha Kembhavi, and Roozbeh Mottaghi. Procthor: Large-scale embodied ai using procedural
generation. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 35:5982–5994, 2022.
[30] Jia Zheng, Junfei Zhang, Jing Li, Rui Tang, Shenghua Gao, and Zihan Zhou. Structured3d: A large
photo-realistic dataset for structured 3d modeling. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part IX 16, pages 519–535. Springer, 2020.
[31] Maximilian Denninger, Martin Sundermeyer, Dominik Winkelbauer, Dmitry Olefir, Tomas Hodan, Youssef
Zidan, Mohamad Elbadrawy, Markus Knauer, Harinandan Katam, and Ahsan Lodhi.
Blenderproc:
Reducing the reality gap with photorealistic rendering. In International Conference on Robotics: Sciene
and Systems, RSS 2020, 2020.
[32] Antoni Rosinol, John J Leonard, and Luca Carlone. Nerf-slam: Real-time dense monocular slam with
neural radiance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2210.13641, 2022.
[33] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for
real-time radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4), 2023.
[34] Tan Zhang, Wenjun Zhang, and Madan M Gupta. Resilient robots: Concept, review, and future directions.
Robotics, 6(4):22, 2017.
[35] Rohan Taori, Achal Dave, Vaishaal Shankar, Nicholas Carlini, Benjamin Recht, and Ludwig Schmidt.
Measuring robustness to natural distribution shifts in image classification. Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, 33:18583–18599, 2020.
[36] Dan Hendrycks and Thomas Dietterich. Benchmarking neural network robustness to common corruptions
and perturbations. Proceedings of the International Conference on Learning Representations, 2019.
[37] Claudio Michaelis, Benjamin Mitzkus, Robert Geirhos, Evgenia Rusak, Oliver Bringmann, Alexander S
Ecker, Matthias Bethge, and Wieland Brendel. Benchmarking robustness in object detection: Autonomous
driving when winter is coming. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07484, 2019.
[38] Alexandra Carlson, Katherine A. Skinner, Ram Vasudevan, and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Modeling
camera effects to improve visual learning from synthetic data. In Proceedings of the European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV) Workshops, September 2018.
[39] Lingdong Kong, Shaoyuan Xie, Hanjiang Hu, Lai Xing Ng, Benoit R Cottereau, and Wei Tsang Ooi.
Robodepth: Robust out-of-distribution depth estimation under corruptions. In Thirty-seventh Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems Datasets and Benchmarks Track, 2023. URL https://
openreview.net/forum?id=SNznC08OOO.
[40] Lingdong Kong, Youquan Liu, Xin Li, Runnan Chen, Wenwei Zhang, Jiawei Ren, Liang Pan, Kai Chen,
and Ziwei Liu. Robo3d: Towards robust and reliable 3d perception against corruptions. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages 19994–20006, 2023.
[41] Christoph Kamann and Carsten Rother. Benchmarking the robustness of semantic segmentation models. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8828–8838,
2020.
[42] Xiaohao Xu, Jinglu Wang, Xiang Ming, and Yan Lu. Towards robust video object segmentation with
adaptive object calibration. In Proceedings of the 30th ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
pages 2709–2718, 2022.
[43] Xiang Li, Jinglu Wang, Xiaohao Xu, Xiao Li, Bhiksha Raj, and Yan Lu. Robust referring video object
segmentation with cyclic structural consensus. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pages 22236–22245, 2023.
[44] Naoki Yokoyama, Qian Luo, Dhruv Batra, and Sehoon Ha. Benchmarking augmentation methods for
learning robust navigation agents: the winning entry of the 2021 igibson challenge. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 1748–1755. IEEE, 2022.
[45] Andréa Macario Barros, Maugan Michel, Yoann Moline, Gwenolé Corre, and Frédérick Carrel. A
comprehensive survey of visual slam algorithms. Robotics, 11(1):24, 2022.
[46] Iman Abaspur Kazerouni, Luke Fitzgerald, Gerard Dooly, and Daniel Toal. A survey of state-of-the-art on
visual slam. Expert Systems with Applications, 205:117734, 2022.
12

<!-- page 13 -->
[47] Raul Mur-Artal, Jose Maria Martinez Montiel, and Juan D Tardos. Orb-slam: a versatile and accurate
monocular slam system. IEEE transactions on robotics, 31(5):1147–1163, 2015.
[48] Raúl Mur-Artal and Juan D. Tardós. Orb-slam2: An open-source slam system for monocular, stereo, and
rgb-d cameras. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 33(5):1255–1262, 2017.
[49] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J. Gómez Rodríguez, José M. M. Montiel, and Juan D. Tardós. Orb-
slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 37(6):1874–1890, 2021.
[50] Nikhil Khedekar, Mihir Kulkarni, and Kostas Alexis. Mimosa: A multi-modal slam framework for resilient
autonomy against sensor degradation. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pages 7153–7159, 2022.
[51] Antoni Rosinol, Andrew Violette, Marcus Abate, Nathan Hughes, Yun Chang, Jingnan Shi, Arjun Gupta,
and Luca Carlone.
Kimera: From slam to spatial perception with 3d dynamic scene graphs.
The
International Journal of Robotics Research, 40(12-14):1510–1546, 2021.
[52] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Droid-slam: Deep visual slam for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras.
Advances in neural information processing systems, 34:16558–16569, 2021.
[53] Hengyi Wang, Jingwen Wang, and Lourdes Agapito. Co-slam: Joint coordinate and sparse parametric
encodings for neural real-time slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 13293–13302, 2023.
[54] Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J Davison. imap: Implicit mapping and positioning
in real-time. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pages
6229–6238, 2021.
[55] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hujun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and
Marc Pollefeys. Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12786–12796, 2022.
[56] Youmin Zhang, Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia, and Matteo Poggi. Go-slam: Global optimization for
consistent 3d instant reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), October 2023.
[57] Shibo Zhao, Damanpreet Singh, Haoxiang Sun, Rushan Jiang, YuanJun Gao, Tianhao Wu, Jay Karhade,
Chuck Whittaker, Ian Higgins, Jiahe Xu, et al. Subt-mrs: A subterranean, multi-robot, multi-spectral and
multi-degraded dataset for robust slam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.07607, 2023.
[58] Mihai Bujanca, Xuesong Shi, Matthew Spear, Pengpeng Zhao, Barry Lennox, and Mikel Luján. Robust
slam systems: Are we there yet? In 2021 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pages 5320–5327. IEEE, 2021.
[59] Sebastian Thrun. Probabilistic robotics. Commun. ACM, 45(3):52–57, 2002.
[60] Emanuel Todorov, Tom Erez, and Yuval Tassa. Mujoco: A physics engine for model-based control. In
2012 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages 5026–5033, 2012.
[61] Dave Shreiner et al. OpenGL programming guide: the official guide to learning OpenGL, versions 3.0 and
3.1. Pearson Education, 2009.
[62] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva
Ramanan, and Jonathan Luiten. Splatam: Splat, track map 3d gaussians for dense rgb-d slam. arXiv, 2023.
[63] David Prokhorov, Dmitry Zhukov, Olga Barinova, Konushin Anton, and Anna Vorontsova. Measuring
robustness of visual slam. In 2019 16th International conference on machine vision applications (MVA),
pages 1–6. IEEE, 2019.
[64] Aditya Ramesh, Mikhail Pavlov, Gabriel Goh, Scott Gray, Chelsea Voss, Alec Radford, Mark Chen, and
Ilya Sutskever. Zero-shot text-to-image generation. In International Conference on Machine Learning,
pages 8821–8831. PMLR, 2021.
[65] Ben Moseley, Valentin Bickel, Ignacio G López-Francos, and Loveneesh Rana. Extreme low-light
environment-driven image denoising over permanently shadowed lunar regions with a physical noise
model. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
6317–6327, 2021.
13

<!-- page 14 -->
[66] Seyed-Mohsen Moosavi-Dezfooli, Alhussein Fawzi, Omar Fawzi, and Pascal Frossard. Universal adver-
sarial perturbations. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 1765–1773, 2017.
[67] Reijgwart, Victor and Millane, Alexander and Oleynikova, Helen and Siegwart, Roland and Cadena, Cesar
and Nieto, Juan. Voxgraph: Globally consistent, volumetric mapping using signed distance function
submaps. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5(1):227–234, 2019.
[68] Wang, Yiduo and Funk, Nils and Ramezani, Milad and Papatheodorou, Sotiris and Popovi´c, Marija and
Camurri, Marco and Leutenegger, Stefan and Fallon, Maurice. Elastic and efficient LiDAR reconstruction
for large-scale exploration tasks. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pages 5035–5041. IEEE, 2021.
[69] Ji Zhang and Sanjiv Singh. LOAM: Lidar odometry and mapping in real-time. Robotics: Science and
Systems Conference (RSS), pages 109–111, 01 2014.
[70] Julio A. Placed, Jared Strader, Henry Carrillo, Nikolay Atanasov, Vadim Indelman, Luca Carlone, and
José A. Castellanos. A survey on active simultaneous localization and mapping: State of the art and new
frontiers. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 39(3):1686–1705, 2023.
[71] Yulun Tian, Yun Chang, Fernando Herrera Arias, Carlos Nieto-Granda, Jonathan P. How, and Luca Carlone.
Kimera-multi: Robust, distributed, dense metric-semantic slam for multi-robot systems. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 38(4):2022–2038, 2022.
[72] Tianyi Zhang and Matthew Johnson-Roberson. Beyond nerf underwater: Learning neural reflectance fields
for true color correction of marine imagery. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 8(10):6467–6474,
2023.
[73] Filippo Basso, Emanuele Menegatti, and Alberto Pretto. Robust intrinsic and extrinsic calibration of rgb-d
cameras. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 34(5):1315–1332, 2018.
[74] Riku Murai, Ignacio Alzugaray, Paul H.J. Kelly, and Andrew J. Davison. Distributed simultaneous
localisation and auto-calibration using gaussian belief propagation. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
9(3):2136–2143, 2024. doi: 10.1109/LRA.2024.3352361.
[75] Timnit Gebru, Jamie Morgenstern, Briana Vecchione, Jennifer Wortman Vaughan, Hanna Wallach,
Hal Daumé III, and Kate Crawford. Datasheets for datasets. Commun. ACM, 64(12):86–92, nov 2021.
ISSN 0001-0782. doi: 10.1145/3458723. URL https://doi.org/10.1145/3458723.
[76] Angel X Chang, Thomas Funkhouser, Leonidas Guibas, Pat Hanrahan, Qixing Huang, Zimo Li, Silvio
Savarese, Manolis Savva, Shuran Song, Hao Su, et al. Shapenet: An information-rich 3d model repository.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
[77] Christoph Kamann and Carsten Rother. Increasing the robustness of semantic segmentation models with
painting-by-numbers. In European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 369–387. Springer, 2020.
[78] Teng Yu, Kang Song, Pu Miao, Guowei Yang, Huan Yang, and Chenglizhao Chen. Nighttime single image
dehazing via pixel-wise alpha blending. IEEE Access, 7:114619–114630, 2019.
[79] Alvy Ray Smith. Image compositing fundamentals. Microsoft Corporation, 5, 1995.
[80] Alexander Von Bernuth, Georg Volk, and Oliver Bringmann. Simulating photo-realistic snow and fog on
existing images for enhanced cnn training and evaluation. In 2019 IEEE Intelligent Transportation Systems
Conference (ITSC), pages 41–46. IEEE, 2019.
[81] Samuel W Hasinoff. Photon, poisson noise. Computer Vision, A Reference Guide, 4(16):1, 2014.
[82] Vittorio Bianco, Pasquale Memmolo, Marco Leo, Silvio Montresor, Cosimo Distante, Melania Paturzo,
Pascal Picart, Bahram Javidi, and Pietro Ferraro. Strategies for reducing speckle noise in digital holography.
Light: Science and Applications, 7(1):48, 2018.
[83] Tae Kyun Kim. T test as a parametric statistic. Korean journal of anesthesiology, 68(6):540–546, 2015.
[84] Charles Spearman. The proof and measurement of association between two things. 1961.
[85] Israel Cohen, Yiteng Huang, Jingdong Chen, Jacob Benesty, Jacob Benesty, Jingdong Chen, Yiteng Huang,
and Israel Cohen. Pearson correlation coefficient. Noise reduction in speech processing, pages 1–4, 2009.
14

<!-- page 15 -->
Table of Contents of the Appendix
• A. Datasheet . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
– A.1 Motivation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .16
– A.2 Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
– A.3 Collection Process . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .18
– A.4 Preprocessing, Cleaning, and/or Labeling . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
– A.5 Uses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 19
– A.6 Distribution and License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 20
– A.7 Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 21
• B. More Details about Perturbation Taxonomy . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .22
– B.1 Perturbation on Sensor Poses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
– B.2 Perturbation on RGB Sensor Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 22
– B.3 Perturbation on Depth Sensor Imaging . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .26
– B.4 Perturbation on RGB-D Sensor Synchronization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .27
• C. More Details about Noisy-Replica SLAM Robustness Benchmark . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
– C.1 Assumptions for Benchmarking Setup . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 28
– C.2 Noisy-Replica Benchmark Statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 29
– C.3 More Details about Baseline Models for Benchmarking . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 31
– C.4 Details about Hardware Setup for Benchmarking Experiments . . . . . . . . . .32
– C.5 Comparison with Existing SLAM Benchmarks . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 32
• D. More Results and Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
– D.1 More Benchmarking Analyses . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 33
– D.2 More Discussions . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 36
• E. Qualitative Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .38
– E.1 Qualitative Results of SLAM Model Performance under Perturbations . . 38
– E.2 Video Demo . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .38
• F. Potential Other Directions to Explore . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 44
• G. Social Impact . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .44
• H. Availability and Maintenance . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
• I. License . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 45
• J. Public Resources Used . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .45
• K. Detailed Benchmarking Tables . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 46
15

<!-- page 16 -->
A
Datasheet
We document the necessary information about the proposed datasets and benchmarks following the
guidelines of Gebru et al. [75].
A.1
Motivation
Q1 For what purpose was the dataset created? Was there a specific task in mind? Was there
a specific gap that needed to be filled? Please provide a description.
• Our benchmark was created to holistically evaluate the robustness of RGB-D SLAM
models under diverse perturbations. Prior to our work, RGB-D SLAM models were
typically evaluated under clean settings. With our customizable perturbation synthesis
pipeline, we assess the models across a wide range of RGB-D perturbations crucial
for real-world deployment: RGB imaging perturbations, depth imaging perturbations,
motion-related perturbations, and RGB-D desynchronization.
Q2 Who created the dataset (e.g., which team, research group) and on behalf of which
entity (e.g., company, institution, organization)?
• This benchmark is presented by researchers from the University of Michigan, Ann
Arbor, and Carnegie Mellon University. Our aim is to advance the study, development,
and deployment of more reliable and robust autonomous systems.
Q3 Who funded the creation of the dataset? If there is an associated grant, please provide the
name of the grantor and the grant name and number.
• This work was partially supported by the Office of Naval Research (Grant #: N00014-
24-1-2137).
Q4 Any other comments?
• No.
A.2
Composition
Q5 What do the instances that comprise the dataset represent (e.g., documents, photos,
people, countries)? Are there multiple types of instances (e.g., movies, users, and ratings;
people and interactions between them; nodes and edges)? Please provide a description.
• Our initialized Noisy-Replica benchmark includes RGB-D video sequences rendered
from scanned 3D scenes, the 6D trajectory at each timestamp, and the 3D scene point
cloud.
Q6 How many instances are there in total (of each type, if appropriate)?
• The Noisy-Replica benchmark contains 2000 RGB-D video sequences under various
perturbation settings. Detailed statistics for each scenario are available in Sec. C.2 of
the Appendix.
Q7 Does the dataset contain all possible instances or is it a sample (not necessarily random)
of instances from a larger set? If the dataset is a sample, what is the larger set? Is the
sample representative of the larger set (e.g., geographic coverage)? If so, please describe
how this representativeness was validated/verified. If it is not representative of the larger set,
please describe why not (e.g., to cover a more diverse range of instances, because instances
were withheld or unavailable).
• The 3D scenes in our benchmark are sourced from the existing 3D scanned indoor
scene dataset Replica [26], and we use all possible instances from these datasets.
Q8 What data does each instance consist of? “Raw” data (e.g., unprocessed text or images)
or features? In either case, please provide a description.
• Each instance consists of RGB-D images, trajectories, and the ground-truth 3D scene.
16

<!-- page 17 -->
Q9 Is there a label or target associated with each instance? If so, please provide a description.
• The RGB-D video sequences for each perturbed setting are rendered from a 3D scan
from the Replica dataset [26].
Q10 Is any information missing from individual instances? If so, please provide a description,
explaining why this information is missing (e.g., because it was unavailable). This does not
include intentionally removed information, but might include, e.g., redacted text.
• No.
Q11 Are relationships between individual instances made explicit (e.g., users’ movie ratings,
social network links)? If so, please describe how these relationships are made explicit.
• Each RGB-D video sequence is rendered in a 3D scene of Replica, conditioned on a
trajectory and a set of perturbations.
Q12 Are there recommended data splits (e.g., training, development/validation, testing)? If
so, please provide a description of these splits, explaining the rationale behind them.
• No. Our benchmark is intended solely for evaluation because RGB-D SLAM models
typically follow an online model optimization/adaptation approach and do not require
an additional training stage.
Q13 Are there any errors, sources of noise, or redundancies in the dataset? If so, please
provide a description.
• No.
Q14 Is the dataset self-contained, or does it link to or otherwise rely on external resources
(e.g., websites, tweets, other datasets)? If it links to or relies on external resources, a) are
there guarantees that they will exist, and remain constant, over time; b) are there official
archival versions of the complete dataset (i.e., including the external resources as they
existed at the time the dataset was created); c) are there any restrictions (e.g., licenses, fees)
associated with any of the external resources that might apply to a future user? Please
provide descriptions of all external resources and any restrictions associated with them, as
well as links or other access points, as appropriate.
• The benchmark is self-contained. We provide all the details and instructions at https:
//github.com/Xiaohao-Xu/SLAM-under-Perturbation.
Q15 Does the dataset contain data that might be considered confidential (e.g., data that is
protected by legal privilege or by doctor–patient confidentiality, data that includes the
content of individuals’ non-public communications)? If so, please provide a description.
• No. The 3D scans used in our Noisy-Replica benchmark are sourced from existing
open-source datasets.
Q16 Does the dataset contain data that, if viewed directly, might be offensive, insulting,
threatening, or might otherwise cause anxiety? If so, please describe why.
• No.
Q17 Does the dataset relate to people? If not, you may skip the remaining questions in this
section.
• No. This dataset does not relate to people.
Q18 Does the dataset identify any subpopulations (e.g., by age, gender)?
• N/A.
Q19 Is it possible to identify individuals (i.e., one or more natural persons), either directly or
indirectly (i.e., in combination with other data) from the dataset? If so, please describe
how.
• N/A.
17

<!-- page 18 -->
Q20 Does the dataset contain data that might be considered sensitive in any way (e.g., data
that reveals racial or ethnic origins, sexual orientations, religious beliefs, political
opinions or union memberships, or locations; financial or health data; biometric or
genetic data; forms of government identification, such as social security numbers;
criminal history)? If so, please provide a description.
• No.
Q21 Any other comments?
• We caution discretion on behalf of the user and call for responsible usage of the
benchmark for research purposes only.
A.3
Collection Process
Q22 How was the data associated with each instance acquired? Was the data directly
observable (e.g., raw text, movie ratings), reported by subjects (e.g., survey responses), or
indirectly inferred/derived from other data (e.g., part-of-speech tags, model-based guesses
for age or language)? If data was reported by subjects or indirectly inferred/derived from
other data, was the data validated/verified? If so, please describe how.
• The 3D scenes used for SLAM data generation in our benchmark are sourced from the
existing open-source dataset Replica [26]. The details of the benchmark construction
are provided in the Experiment section (Sec. 5) of the main paper, with further details
in Sec. C of the Appendix.
Q23 What mechanisms or procedures were used to collect the data (e.g., hardware apparatus
or sensor, manual human curation, software program, software API)? How were these
mechanisms or procedures validated?
• We did not collect additional raw data. Our main contribution is the development of a
perturbation taxonomy and toolbox to transform existing clean SLAM datasets and 3D
scenes into noisy SLAM datasets with perturbations for robustness evaluation.
Q24 If the dataset is a sample from a larger set, what was the sampling strategy (e.g.,
deterministic, probabilistic with specific sampling probabilities)?
• Our benchmark does not include new raw data collection. We render the RGB-D sensor
streams using 3D scene models sourced from the Replica dataset [26], which comprises
real 3D scans of indoor scenes. We selected the same set of eight rooms and offices as
the (clean) Replica-SLAM dataset [54] for consistent comparison.
Q25 Who was involved in the data collection process (e.g., students, crowdworkers, contrac-
tors) and how were they compensated (e.g., how much were crowdworkers paid)?
• N/A. Our benchmark does not include new raw data collection.
Q26 Over what timeframe was the data collected? Does this timeframe match the creation
timeframe of the data associated with the instances (e.g., recent crawl of old news
articles)? If not, please describe the timeframe in which the data associated with the
instances was created.
• N/A. Our benchmark does not include new raw data collection.
Q27 Were any ethical review processes conducted (e.g., by an institutional review board)? If
so, please provide a description of these review processes, including the outcomes, as well
as a link or other access point to any supporting documentation.
• N/A. Our benchmark does not include new raw data collection.
Q28 Does the dataset relate to people? If not, you may skip the remaining questions in this
section.
• No.
18

<!-- page 19 -->
Q29 Did you collect the data from the individuals in question directly, or obtain it via third
parties or other sources (e.g., websites)?
• N/A. Our dataset does not relate to people.
Q30 Were the individuals in question notified about the data collection? If so, please describe
(or show with screenshots or other information) how notice was provided, and provide a link
or other access point to, or otherwise reproduce, the exact language of the notification itself.
• N/A. Our dataset does not relate to people.
Q31 Did the individuals in question consent to the collection and use of their data? If so,
please describe (or show with screenshots or other information) how consent was requested
and provided, and provide a link or other access point to, or otherwise reproduce, the exact
language to which the individuals consented.
• N/A. Our dataset does not relate to people.
Q32 If consent was obtained, were the consenting individuals provided with a mechanism to
revoke their consent in the future or for certain uses? If so, please provide a description,
as well as a link or other access point to the mechanism (if appropriate).
• N/A. Our dataset does not relate to people.
Q33 Has an analysis of the potential impact of the dataset and its use on data subjects (e.g.,
a data protection impact analysis) been conducted? If so, please provide a description
of this analysis, including the outcomes, as well as a link or other access point to any
supporting documentation.
• We discuss the limitations of our current work in the Conclusion and Future Work
section of the main paper, and we plan to further investigate and analyze the impact
of our benchmark in future work. We acknowledge the potential data biases and
limitations of our initial benchmark and have detailed the assumptions made during
benchmark construction in Sec. C.1 of the Appendix.
Q34 Any other comments?
• No.
A.4
Preprocessing, Cleaning, and/or Labeling
Q35 Was any preprocessing/cleaning/labeling of the data done (e.g., discretization or bucket-
ing, tokenization, part-of-speech tagging, SIFT feature extraction, removal of instances,
processing of missing values)? If so, please provide a description. If not, you may skip the
remainder of the questions in this section.
• No preprocessing or labeling was performed.
Q36 Was the “raw” data saved in addition to the preprocessed/cleaned/labeled data (e.g., to
support unanticipated future uses)? If so, please provide a link or other access point to
the “raw” data.
• N/A. No preprocessing or labeling was performed for creating the scenarios.
Q37 Is the software used to preprocess/clean/label the instances available? If so, please
provide a link or other access point.
• N/A. No preprocessing or labeling was performed for creating the scenarios.
Q38 Any other comments?
• No.
A.5
Uses
Q39 Has the dataset been used for any tasks already? If so, please provide a description.
19

<!-- page 20 -->
• Not yet. We present a new benchmark.
Q40 Is there a repository that links to any or all papers or systems that use the dataset? If
so, please provide a link or other access point.
• We will provide links to works that use our benchmark at https://github.com/
Xiaohao-Xu/SLAM-under-Perturbation.
Q41 What (other) tasks could the dataset be used for?
• The primary use case of our benchmark is to study the robustness of RGB-D SLAM
models under perturbations.
• While we did not explore this direction in the present work, our benchmark can be
used for research on the robustness of RGB-D sensing-related downstream tasks in the
future.
Q42 Is there anything about the composition of the dataset or the way it was collected
and preprocessed/cleaned/labeled that might impact future uses? For example, is there
anything that a future user might need to know to avoid uses that could result in unfair
treatment of individuals or groups (e.g., stereotyping, quality of service issues) or other
undesirable harms (e.g., financial harms, legal risks)? If so, please provide a description. Is
there anything a future user could do to mitigate these undesirable harms?
• No.
Q43 Are there tasks for which the dataset should not be used? If so, please provide a
description.
• No.
Q44 Any other comments?
• No.
A.6
Distribution and License
Q45 Will the dataset be distributed to third parties outside of the entity (e.g., company,
institution, organization) on behalf of which the dataset was created? If so, please
provide a description.
• Yes, this benchmark has been open-sourced.
Q46 How will the dataset be distributed (e.g., tarball on website, API, GitHub)? Does the
dataset have a digital object identifier (DOI)?
• Our benchmark and the code used for evaluation are available at https://github.
com/Xiaohao-Xu/SLAM-under-Perturbation.
Q47 When will the dataset be distributed?
• May 24, 2024, and onward.
Q48 Will the dataset be distributed under a copyright or other intellectual property (IP)
license, and/or under applicable terms of use (ToU)? If so, please describe this license
and/or ToU, and provide a link or other access point to, or otherwise reproduce, any relevant
licensing terms or ToU, as well as any fees associated with these restrictions.
• The 3D scene dataset Replica and the benchmarking methods used in our benchmark
are sourced from existing open-source repositories, as illustrated in Sec. J. The license
associated with them is followed accordingly.
• Our code is released under the Apache-2.0 license.
Q49 Have any third parties imposed IP-based or other restrictions on the data associated
with the instances? If so, please describe these restrictions, and provide a link or other
access point to, or otherwise reproduce, any relevant licensing terms, as well as any fees
associated with these restrictions.
20

<!-- page 21 -->
• We release it under the Apache-2.0 license.
• We do not own the copyright of the original 3D scenes used for rendering our SLAM
benchmark.
Q50 Do any export controls or other regulatory restrictions apply to the dataset or to
individual instances? If so, please describe these restrictions, and provide a link or other
access point to, or otherwise reproduce, any supporting documentation.
• No.
Q51 Any other comments?
• No.
A.7
Maintenance
Q52 Who will be supporting/hosting/maintaining the dataset?
• The Robotics Department of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, will be supporting,
hosting, and maintaining the benchmark.
• The first author, Xiaohao Xu, will be the main manager of the benchmark.
Q53 How can the owner/curator/manager of the dataset be contacted (e.g., email address)?
• Robotics Department of the University of Michigan, Ann Arbor:
https://
robotics.umich.edu/
• Xiaohao Xu: xiaohaox@umich.edu
Q54 Is there an erratum? If so, please provide a link or other access point.
• There is no erratum for our initial release. Errata will be documented as future releases
on the benchmark website.
Q55 Will the dataset be updated (e.g., to correct labeling errors, add new instances, delete in-
stances)? If so, please describe how often, by whom, and how updates will be communicated
to users (e.g., mailing list, GitHub)?
• Yes, our benchmark will be updated. We plan to expand scenarios, metrics, and models
to be evaluated.
Q56 If the dataset relates to people, are there applicable limits on the retention of the data
associated with the instances (e.g., were individuals in question told that their data
would be retained for a fixed period of time and then deleted)? If so, please describe
these limits and explain how they will be enforced.
• N/A. Our dataset does not relate to people.
Q57 Will older versions of the dataset continue to be supported/hosted/maintained? If so,
please describe how. If not, please describe how its obsolescence will be communicated to
users.
• We will host other versions.
Q58 If others want to extend/augment/build on/contribute to the dataset, is there a mech-
anism for them to do so? If so, please provide a description. Will these contributions
be validated/verified? If so, please describe how. If not, why not? Is there a process for
communicating/distributing these contributions to other users? If so, please provide a
description.
• Users may contact us by reporting an issue on our benchmark GitHub page https://
github.com/Xiaohao-Xu/SLAM-under-Perturbation or directly con-
tacting the author of this project (Xiaohao Xu, xiaohaox@umich.edu) to request
adding new scenarios, metrics, or models.
Q59 Any other comments?
• No.
21

<!-- page 22 -->
B
More Details about Perturbation Taxonomy
Original
Rotate 
(3°)
Rotate 
(5°)
Translate 
(0.0125m)
Translate 
(0.025m)
Translate 
(0.05m)
Rotate 
(1°)
Faster 
Motion (2×)
t
Not Observed
Vertical lines
(for reference)
t+1
t+2
t
t+1
t+2
Figure A: Rendered RGB image streams under trajectory-level perturbations, including transla-
tion deviations (Translate), rotation deviations (Rotate), and the faster motion effect.
B.1
Perturbation on Sensor Poses
Real-world deployments of embodied agents face challenges such as robotic platform vibrations,
uneven terrain, and dynamic motions, which impact sensor pose estimations and degrade SLAM
performance. Most existing benchmarks [26, 76] use smooth trajectories, resulting in stable sensor
observations. However, this does not reflect the complexities of real-world scenarios with unstable
sensor movements. For example, deploying a visual SLAM system on a legged robot traversing
uneven terrain introduces significant motion deviations and vibrations, affecting sensor pose esti-
mates and visual observations. Our work addresses this gap by introducing trajectory and motion
perturbations that simulate real-world complexities and instabilities in sensor poses. Our findings
indicate that even advanced SLAM models can fail and lose tracking when confronted with unstable
observations due to dynamic motions, which reveals the importance to consider motion perturbations.
Specifically, we consider the following two main categories of motion perturbations:
Motion deviations. To simulate sensor pose vibrations experienced by mobile embodied agents, we
introduce motion deviations. These deviations perturb the original sensor pose by applying a rotation
perturbation (∆R ∈SO(3)) and a translation perturbation (∆t ∈R3). The perturbed rotation
matrix is calculated as R′ = R∆R, and the perturbed translation vector as t′ = t + ∆t. Specifically,
the translation and rotation transformations are randomly perturbed using values sampled from a
Gaussian distribution. In Fig. A, we present the rendered sensor streams under varying severity levels
of trajectory-level perturbations, encompassing translational deviations, rotational deviations, and
faster motion effects. Although the rotational and translational deviations we examined result in minor
changes in observations between adjacent frames, these perturbations lead to significant performance
degradation across the majority of benchmarking SLAM models. As depicted in Fig. B, even slight
trajectory-level deviations can have a substantial impact on trajectory estimation performance.
Faster motion effect. To evaluate the robustness of perception models for embodied agents under
agile motion, we introduce a faster motion scenario by down-sampling the original sensor stream
along the time axis.
B.2
Perturbation on RGB Sensor Imaging
The perturbations on RGB imaging are designed to model potential error sources throughout the
entire RGB image formation and processing pipeline, from the 3D world to the final 2D image. The
perturbation sources include environmental interference effects that affect light transmission, blurring
effects partially caused by lens-related distortions, noise due to imperfections in the image sensors,
22

<!-- page 23 -->
Faster Motion
Effect (2×)
Original
(Clean) 
Translation
Deviation 
(0.025m)
ATE: 0.1247
ATE: 0.7970
Rotation
Deviation 
(1°)
ATE: 0.6656
ATE: 0.8697
Translation
Deviation 
(0.0125m)
ATE: 0.2077
ATE: 0.2704
Estimated Trajectory
Ground-truth Trajectory
Rotation
Deviation 
(3°)
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
y [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
x [m]
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
-4.5 -3.5 -3.0 -2.5 -2.0 -1.5 -1.0 -0.5
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
0.50
0.25
0.00
-0.25
-0.50
-0.75
-1.00
-1.25
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
1.00
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
-3.5
-3.0
-2.5
-2.0
-1.5
-1.0
0.50
0.00
-0.50
-1.00
-1.50
1.00
-4.0
-3.0
-2.0
-1.0
0.0
-0.5
Figure B: Illustrations of motion deviations and the faster motion effect. We present the synthe-
sized ground-truth trajectories (in black) and the estimated trajectories (in blue) obtained using the
CO-SLAM [53] model. For clarity, we visualize the projected trajectory on the horizontal x-y plane
derived from the 3D trajectory, which shows that slight trajectory deviations can have a significant
impact on the trajectory estimation performance.
and post-processing effects on the image. Prominent RGB image perturbations [36] (see Fig. 2b of
the main paper) are detailed in the following paragraphs.
Environmental interference. Environmental interference including weather effects [77, 78] are com-
monly simulated via alpha blending techniques [79]. This involves blending a perturbed enviromental
effect layer with the clean image to generate a composite perturbed image.
• Snow effect. To simulate the disturbances caused by snowfall, we construct a snow effect
layer with random regional white values [80].
• Frost effect. The frost effect introduces a semi-transparent whitening overlay on the
image [37]. This effect is modeled through a weighted combination of the original image
and the whitened version of the image.
• Fog effect. The fog effect results in a hazy observation. A simplified model [36] to simulate
this effect is achieved through linear interpolation between the original image and a constant
gray-value image.
• Spatter effect. The spatter effect mimics the appearance of droplets on a lens or window.
To achieve this effect, a layer comprising semi-transparent dark spots or streaks is blended
with the image. Considering the local property of the spatters, we incorporate a hard mask
onto the spatter effect layer. This mask designates transparent regions as 0 and perturbed
(occupied) regions as 1, thereby controlling the visibility of the spatter effect in specific
areas.
Lens-related distortions (specifically blur). To simulate various blur effects caused by lens imper-
fections or camera motion, we convolve the input image with specific blur kernels, resulting in a
blurred image.
• Defocus blur. This effect simulates the out-of-focus visuals caused by camera lens proper-
ties. It can be modeled by convolving the input image with a circular disc (bokeh) kernel.
• Glass blur. Emulating the appearance of viewing through textured or patterned glass, this
effect adds complexity to the blurring process. The glass texture is approximated using an
irregular kernel.
23

<!-- page 24 -->
• Motion blur. Rapid movement during image capture, either by the camera or objects in the
scene, results in motion blur. This effect can be represented by convolving the image with a
linear kernel oriented in the direction of motion.
• Gaussian blur. Gaussian blur convolves the image with a Gaussian kernel. The standard
deviation of Gaussian distribution determines the blurring level.
Sensor noises. RGB image sensors inherently introduce noise during image acquisition, impacting
image quality.
• Gaussian noise. To simulate the presence of Gaussian noise, we introduce additive noise
for each pixel in the original clean image to create a corrupted version of the image. The
noise is sampled from a Gaussian distribution with zero mean.
• Shot noise. Shot noise is associated with the random arrival of photons or particles during
the image capture process. It can be modeled using a Poisson distribution [81].
• Impulse noise. To simulate impulse noise, we introduce randomness to each pixel. For
every pixel, we sample one random value between 0 and 1. If the sampled value falls within
the range of 0 to a/2 (where a ∈(0, 1)), the pixel is assigned the minimum intensity value,
while it is set to the maximum intensity value if the value lies between a/2 and a. Finally, if
the sampled value is between a and 1, the pixel remains unchanged.
• Speckle noise. Speckle noise [82], applied to each pixel (x, y) of the original clean image
I, can be modeled as a multiplicative noise process:
I′(x, y) = I(x, y) × (1 + ρ × η)
(2)
where ρ controls the intensity level of the speckle noise, and η represents the term of
Gaussian noise.
Post-processing. Image post-processing techniques can introduce perturbations that alter the original
pixel values.
• Brightness. This effect adjusts the global luminance of the image. Image brightness is
adjusted by adding a constant offset to each pixel.
• Contrast. This effect alters the tone variance of each pixel (x, y) of the image by linear
scaling about the mean intensity J :
I′(x, y) = β × (I(x, y) −J ) + J
(3)
where β controls the contrast level.
• JPEG compression. This effect simulates lossy compression artifacts when using the JPEG
image compression.
• Pixelate. This effect reduces resolution by dividing the image into blocks and setting all
pixels in each block to the block’s average value.
Implementation of RGB imaging perturbations. As shown in Table A, we define five severity
levels for each type of RGB imaging perturbation, following established robustness evaluation
literature [36]. The specific implementation details can be found in our RGB Imaging Perturbation
Synthesis Toolbox, available on our GitHub. We illustrate RGB imaging perturbations under different
severity levels in Fig. C.
24

<!-- page 25 -->
Table A: Specific configurations of the RGB imaging perturbations.
Perturbation
Parameter
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Snow Effect
(Mean, std, scale,
threshold, blur radius,
blur std, blending ratio)
0.1, 0.3, 3.0,
0.5, 10.0, 4.0, 0.8
0.2, 0.3, 2,
0.5, 12, 4, 0.7
0.55, 0.3, 4,
0.9, 12, 8, 0.7
0.55, 0.3, 4.5,
0.85, 12, 8, 0.65
0.55, 0.3, 2.5,
0.85, 12, 12, 0.55
Frost Effect
(Frost intensity, texture influence)
(1.00, 0.40)
(0.80, 0.60)
(0.70, 0.70)
(0.65, 0.70)
(0.60, 0.75)
Fog Effect
(Thickness, smoothness)
(1.5, 2.0)
(2.0, 2.0)
(2.5, 1.7)
(2.5, 1.5)
(3.0, 1.4)
Spatter Effect
(mean, standard deviation,
sigma, threshold,
scaling factor, complexity of effect)
(0.65, 0.3, 4,
0.69, 0.6, 0)
(0.65, 0.3, 3,
0.68, 0.6, 0)
(0.65, 0.3, 2,
0.68, 0.5, 0)
(0.65, 0.3, 1,
0.65, 1.5, 1)
(0.67, 0.4, 1,
0.65, 1.5, 1)
Defocus Blur
(Kernel radius, alias blur)
(3.0, 0.1)
(4.0, 0.5)
(6.0, 0.5)
(8.0, 0.5)
(10.0, 0.5)
Glass Blur
(Sigma, max delta, iterations)
(0.7, 1.0, 2.0)
(0.9, 2.0, 1.0)
(1.0, 2.0, 3.0)
(1.1, 3.0, 2.0)
(1.5, 4.0, 2.0)
Motion Blur
(Radius, sigma)
(10, 3)
(15, 5)
(15, 8)
(15, 12)
(20, 15)
Gaussian Blur
Sigma
1
2
3
4
6
Gaussian Noise
Noise scale
0.08
0.12
0.18
0.26
0.38
Shot Noise
Photon number
60
25
12
5
3
Impulse Noise
Noise amount
0.03
0.06
0.09
0.17
0.27
Speckle Noise
Noise scale
0.15
0.2
0.35
0.45
0.6
Brightness Increase
Adjustment ratio
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Contrast Decrease
Adjustment of pixel mean
0.40
0.30
0.20
0.10
0.05
JPEG Compression
Compression quality
25
18
15
10
7
Pixelate
Resize factor
0.60
0.50
0.40
0.30
0.25
Brightness
Contrast
Defocus
Blur
Gaussian
Noise
Gaussian
Blur
Glass
Blur
Fog
Effect
Frost
Effect
Spatter
Pixelate
Motion
Blur
Shot
Noise
Impulse
Noise
Speckle
Noise
Snow
Effect
Jpeg
Compression
Low
Middle
High
Low
Middle
High
Figure C: Illustration of RGB imaging perturbations under different severity levels. We consider
16 common image corruption types [36] from 4 main categories of perturbations for robustness evalu-
ation: (1) noise-based distortions: Gaussian Noise, Shot Noise, Impulse Noise, and Speckle Noise;
(2) blur-based effects: Defocus Blur, Glass Blur, Motion Blur, and Gaussian Blur; (3) environ-
mental interferences: Snow Effect, Frost Effect, Fog Effect, and Spatter Effect. (4) post-processing
manipulations: Brightness, Contrast, Pixelate, and JPEG Compression. Each perturbation type is
further split into 3 severity levels (low, middle, and high), which corresponds to Level 1, Level 3, and
Level 5 of Table A.
25

<!-- page 26 -->
Depth Min Depth Max Depth Mean Depth Std
0
2
4
6
8
10
Depth [m]
0.42
10.50
1.22
0.41
0.18
6.76
2.42
0.56
(a) Depth Distribution
TUM-RGBD
Replica
Mean
Std
0
5
10
15
20
25
30
Missing Rate [%]
24.719
9.571
0.394
1.440
(b) Depth Missing Rate
TUM-RGBD
Replica
Figure D: Discrepancy in depth characteristics between existing simulated and real-world
SLAM datasets. Here, we compare the depth (a) distribution and (b) missing rate between real-
world collected depth from TUM-RGBD [12] dataset and simulated depth from Replica [26] dataset.
B.3
Perturbation on Depth Sensor Imaging
As depicted in Fig. D, there exists a noticeable disparity between the current simulated clean
depth distribution obtained from the Replica [26] SLAM benchmark and the real noisy depth data
derived from the TUM-RGBD [18] SLAM benchmark. In Replica, the minimum depth measures
approximately 0.18 m, whereas the TUM-RGBD data exhibits a minimum depth value of 0.4 m,
reflecting the limitations of real-world depth sensors. Notably, we observe a significant discrepancy
in the depth missing rates, with TUM-RGBD demonstrating an approximate 25% missing rate
compared to nearly zero (0.39%) in Replica. These observations underscore the necessity of exploring
perturbation strategies for depth imaging to bridge the gap between simulated and real-world depth.
Specifically, we consider the following four types of depth perturbations that the sensing limitations
of real depth sensors:
Gaussian noise. This operation simulates the random noise inherent to depth sensors, which typically
follows a Gaussian distribution. Each pixel (x, y) in the original depth map D is perturbed by adding
a Gaussian noise η, resulting in the corrupted depth map D′: D′(x, y) = D(x, y) + η.
Edge erosion. The multi-path interference effect of certain depth sensors (e.g., time-of-flight sensors)
can lead to inaccurate depth measurements, particularly for regions with complex geometries. To
simulate this perturbation, we first leverage the edge detection algorithm to obtain the edges and then
remove a subset of edge pixels P:
D′(x, y) =
 VOID
if (x, y) ∈P
D(x, y)
otherwise
(4)
Random missing depth data. This perturbation introduces random masked regions to simulate
occlusions or missing depth data. Specifically, a binary mask M is applied to the depth map, where
the masked regions are set to a void value:
D′ = D ⊙M
(5)
Here, ⊙denotes element-wise multiplication. The binary mask M is generated by randomly sampling
rectangular patches within the depth image.
Range clipping. This perturbation accounts for the limited depth coverage of real-world depth
sensors. Objects beyond this range will appear as missing data in the depth image. Specifically, any
depth value D(x, y) falling outside a specified range [Dmin, Dmax] is replaced with a predefined
void value to represent depth missing.
26

<!-- page 27 -->
Table B: Specific configurations of the depth imaging perturbations.
Perturbation
Parameter
Level 1
Level 2
Level 3
Level 4
Level 5
Gaussian Noise
Noise scale
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Edge Erosion
Erosion rate
0.015
0.020
0.025
0.03
0.035
Random missing depth data
Missing rate (%)
10
15
20
25
30
Range clipping
(Min depth, Max depth)
(0.2, 4.4)
(0.3, 4.2)
(0.4, 4.0)
(0.5, 3.8)
(0.6, 3.6)
Implementation of depth imaging perturbations. As shown in Table A, we define five severity
levels for each type of depth imaging perturbation, following the depth distribution of real depth
maps [12]. The specific implementation details can be found in our Depth Imaging Perturbation
Synthesis Toolbox, available on our GitHub.
B.4
Perturbation on RGB-D Sensor Synchronization
To emulate sensor delays in cases where multiple sensors within an RGB-D sensing system are not
synchronized, we introduce temporal misalignment between sensor streams (see Fig. 2d of the main
paper). Consider two initially synchronized sensor streams, denoted as S1(t) and S2(t). We simulate
a delay in the second stream by shifting its sensor sequence by a frame interval ∆. This creates
perturbed streams S′
1(t) = S1(t) and S′
2(t) = S2(t + ∆). While one sensor stream is shifted, the
poses associated with each sensor reading remain unchanged. This ensures the system is operating
on data grounded in the past, reflecting the real-world scenario of misaligned sensor information.
27

<!-- page 28 -->
C
More Details about Noisy-Replica SLAM Robustness Benchmark
C.1
Assumptions for Benchmarking Setup
We initialize the Noisy-Replica benchmark for SLAM model robustness evaluation under the following
assumptions.
Task. We focus on the standard (passive) SLAM setting, assuming the absence of active decision-
making processes.
Model. Our analysis is centered on vision-oriented SLAM scenarios, specifically targeting monocular
and RGB-D settings. We assume the use of dense depth representation as opposed to sparse depth
data obtained from a LiDAR scanner. In addition, the SLAM system is presumed to have known
motion and observation models.
Perturbation. Although our noisy data synthesis pipeline is capable of generating SLAM benchmarks
with multiple heterogeneous perturbations, we concentrate on investigating the performance degrada-
tion caused by individual sensor or trajectory perturbations. This focused approach is designed to
dissect the system’s response to isolated perturbations, allowing precise quantification of their specific
impacts on SLAM performance. By analyzing the degradation induced by individual perturbations,
we can effectively assess the system’s robustness in a controlled manner and identify the root causes
of performance degradation. This knowledge is crucial for developing targeted mitigation strategies
that address the most vulnerable aspects, i.e., Achilles’ Heel, of the whole SLAM system. Also, we
model these perturbations using simplified linear models (e.g., Gaussian noise assumptions), in line
with precedent set by established literature [36, 27, 3]. While these simplified perturbations may not
fully capture the complexity of real-world scenarios, they offer interpretability and facilitate analysis
across different perturbation types.
3D scene. We assume that the environment is static, meaning there are no moving or dynamically
changing objects within the scene. Also, the scene is bounded, typically referring to an indoor setting
with predefined boundaries or limits.
28

<!-- page 29 -->
C.2
Noisy-Replica Benchmark Statistics
Benchmark sequence number distribution. Using our established taxonomy of perturbations
for SLAM and the noisy data synthesis pipeline, we have created a large-scale SLAM robustness
benchmark called Noisy-Replica to evaluate the robustness of monocular and multi-modal RGB-D
SLAM methods by incorporating various perturbations that mimic real-world sensor and motion
effects.
Each perturbed setting of our benchmark is rendered in eight scenes from the 3D indoor scan dataset
Replica [26]. This process generates eight sequences from a single trajectory. For each perturbed
setting, we calculate the average result from 24 experimental data points (eight sequences, each
repeated three times). Then, we report the averaged result for each perturbed setting. Specifically, for
the RGB imaging perturbation, we present the averaged result across three severity levels, under both
static and dynamic perturbation modes.
We provide details about the specific distribution and setup of each perturbed setting as follows:
• 8 original clean sequences: These sequences replicate the quality and the sequence number
of the original Replica SLAM dataset [54].
• 768 sequences with RGB imaging perturbations: We apply 16 different types of image-
level perturbations at 3 severity levels (Level 1, Level3, and Level 5 of Table A), both under
static and dynamic conditions.
• 32 sequences with depth imaging perturbations: This category consists of 4 types of
perturbations. For the depth noise, we adopt the hyperparameters of the Gaussian noise
distribution as specified in previous literature [36]. Moreover, we set the depth missing rate
to 20% and establish the depth clipping range based on the real-world depth distribution of
the TUM-RGBD dataset [12]. The severity strength of each depth perturbation is shown in
the Level 3 column of Table B.
• 24 sequences with faster motion effects: These sequences involve faster speed than the
original sequences, with variations of two, four, and eight times the original speed.
• 120 sequences with motion deviations: This category includes pure rotation deviation,
pure translation deviation, and combined transformation matrix deviation. We define three
severity levels for both rotation and translation deviations, and sample the deviation from a
Gaussian distribution. Specifically, for rotation deviation, we introduce random deviations in
rotation around the x, y, and z axes, with mean values of zero and standard deviations of 1, 3,
and 5 degrees at each pose frame. For translation deviation, we introduce random deviations
in the x, y, and z axes, with mean values of zero and standard deviations of 0.0125, 0.025,
and 0.05 meters at each pose frame. In Fig. E, we show the motion statistics of the perturbed
trajectory sequences under varying combinations of translation and rotation deviations. This
category of trajectory-deviated sequences encompasses a broad spectrum of motion speeds
and accelerations, enabling a progressive evaluation of the robustness of SLAM models
against increasingly challenging motion types. These insights are especially valuable for
evaluating the implementation of SLAM systems in high-speed scenarios or on agile robot
platforms exposed to significant vibrations.
• 48 sequences with RGB-D sensor de-synchronization: We consider both static and
dynamic perturbation models for multi-sensor misalignment. In the static mode, a constant
time delay is synthesized between the two sensor streams, while in the dynamic perturbation
model, there is a varying time delay between the streams. Specifically, the multi-sensor
misalignment perturbation sequences consist of 24 sequences with a fixed cross-sensor
frame delay interval (∆) of 5, 10, and 20 frames, as well as 24 sequences with dynamic
perturbation where ∆deviates by 1 frame from the fixed intervals of 5, 10, and 20 frames.
Overall, this benchmark dataset enables a comprehensive evaluation of existing SLAM algorithms
under simulated perturbations, providing a thorough assessment of the robustness of multi-modal
SLAM systems in a wide range of challenges.
29

<!-- page 30 -->
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
Translation speed (m/s)
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
0.21
0.39
0.69
1.34
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
40
30
20
10
0
10
20
30
40
Translation acceleration (m/s²)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
0
2
4
6
8
Rotation speed (°/s)
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.18
0.82
0.81
0.81
0.82
2.37
2.38
2.39
2.36
3.93
3.93
3.93
3.94
rot:0°, tran:0.0000m
rot:0°, tran:0.0125m
rot:0°, tran:0.0250m
rot:0°, tran:0.0500m
rot:1°, tran:0.0000m
rot:1°, tran:0.0125m
rot:1°, tran:0.0250m
rot:1°, tran:0.0500m
rot:3°, tran:0.0000m
rot:3°, tran:0.0125m
rot:3°, tran:0.0250m
rot:3°, tran:0.0500m
rot:5°, tran:0.0000m
rot:5°, tran:0.0125m
rot:5°, tran:0.0250m
rot:5°, tran:0.0500m
100
50
0
50
100
Rotation acceleration (°/s²)
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.00
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.01
0.00
-0.01
0.01
0.00
Figure E: Motion statistics of trajectory distribution under varying combinations of translation
and rotation deviations. Assuming a frame rate of 20 frames per second for the SLAM system, i.e.,
a time interval of 0.05 seconds between neighboring pose frames, we present the motion distribution
of perturbed trajectories in the proposed Noisy-Replica benchmark. The figures show the distribution
of translation speed (Top Left), translation acceleration (Top Right), rotation speed (Bottom Left),
and rotation acceleration (Bottom Right). We report the mean value of each setting.
30

<!-- page 31 -->
Table C: RGB-D SLAM methods for robustness evaluation.
Method
Type
Modality
Mono/RGB-D
Map Representation
Loop
Closure
External
Data
Speed
Processing
Year
ORB-SLAM3 [49]
Classical, Sparse
/
Keyframe+ORB, Explicit
Real-time
CPU
2020
iMAP [54]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based(1), Implicit
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2021
Nice-SLAM [55]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based, Implicit
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2022
CO-SLAM [53]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based, Implicit
Real-time
CPU+GPU
2023
GO-SLAM [56]
Neural, Dense
/
NeRF-based, Implicit
(2)
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2023
SplaTAM-S [62]
Neural, Dense
/
Gaussian [33], Explicit
Quasi Real-time
CPU+GPU
2024
(1) ‘NeRF-based’ indicates methods that leverage implicit neural networks to encode the 3D scene, following the philosophy of NeRF [32].
(2) GO-SLAM initializes the model parameters from the DROID-SLAM model [52] which leverages external data [27] for model pre-training.
C.3
More Details about Baseline Models for Benchmarking
Additional descriptions about benchmarking models. While previous SLAM robustness evalua-
tions primarily focused on classical methods [27, 58], our benchmark encompasses both classical and
learning-based SLAM systems. As shown in Table C, in addition to ORB-SLAM3 [49], we evaluate
Neural SLAM models including iMAP [54], Nice-SLAM [55], CO-SLAM [53], GO-SLAM [56], and
SplaTAM-S [62]. The hyperparameters are set based on the recommendations given in the original
papers or use default settings otherwise.
Below, we offer additional descriptions of SLAM models that have been benchmarked on our
Noisy-Replica benchmark.
• ORB-SLAM3 [49]: An extension of ORB-SLAM2 [48] that incorporates a multi-map
system and visual-inertial odometry, enhancing robustness and performance.
• iMAP [54]: A neural RGB-D SLAM system that utilizes the MLP representation to achieve
joint tracking and mapping.
• Nice-SLAM [55]: A neural RGB-D SLAM model that employs a multi-level feature grid
for scene representation, reducing computational overhead and improving scalability.
• CO-SLAM [53]: An advanced neural RGB-D SLAM system with a hybrid representation,
enabling robust camera tracking and high-fidelity surface reconstruction in real time.
• GO-SLAM [56]: A neural visual SLAM framework for real-time optimization of poses and
3D reconstruction. It supports both monocular and RGB-D input settings.
• SplaTAM [62]: A neural RGB-D SLAM model that follows Gaussian Splatting [33] to
construct an adaptive map representation based on Gaussian kernels. Due to time and
computational constraints, we evaluate the relatively more efficient SplaTAM-S model
variant in our benchmark.
Remark: Neural SLAM models are inherently ‘trained’ on the testing distribution. Neural
SLAM models are optimized (i.e., ‘trained’) on perturbed RGB-D observations, enabling continuous
adaptation and updating of internal representations based on incoming data at each timestamp. This
inherently includes ‘training with introduced perturbations’, as the models adjust to variations during
online operation. Neural SLAM methods like Nice-SLAM [55], CO-SLAM [53], and GO-SLAM [56]
leverage Neural Radiance Field (NeRF) as the map representation, updating the parameters of NeRF
network and the parameters of poses for each frame when new observations arrive during testing;
SplaTAM [62] leverages explicit Gaussian Splats [33] as the map representation, updating the
parameters of Gaussian kernels as well as the parameters of poses for each frame during testing. We
find that this test-time online learning mechanism provides better robustness compared to non-neural
SLAM methods without adaptation capabilities, allowing neural SLAM models to be robust to
static RGBD imaging perturbations by continuously refining their environment understanding for
optimal performance. Generally speaking, our experimental setup adheres to the standard practice for
evaluating neural SLAM models that have test-time online learning capabilities.
31

<!-- page 32 -->
C.4
Details about Hardware Setup for Benchmarking Experiments
Our experiments were primarily conducted on a GPU server equipped with two NVIDIA A6000
GPUs, each featuring 48 GB of memory. These resources were utilized for synthesizing perturbed
noisy data and evaluating the robustness of RGB-D SLAM models. The operating system used was
Ubuntu 22.04. Additionally, we tested the compatibility of our benchmarking code on a GPU server
with four NVIDIA RTX6000 Ada GPUs, each with 48 GB of memory, and on a GPU server with two
NVIDIA A100 GPUS, each with 40 GB of memory.
It is important to note that the memory requirements of different SLAM methods vary based on the
complexity of the perturbed RGB-D video sequences used for evaluation and the specific memory
cost of each method. For instance, the CO-SLAM [53] model can run on a GPU with 12GB of
memory. Meanwhile, only a GPU is required for all the SLAM methods evaluated in our study under
each perturbed setting.
C.5
Comparison with Existing SLAM Benchmarks
While acknowledging existing SLAM benchmarks [6–19], our proposed noisy data synthesis pipeline
and the instantiated benchmark Noisy-Replica for RGB-D SLAM robustness evaluation offer several
distinct advantages that can further advance the SoTA in SLAM evaluation:
Unparalleled diversity and controllability. With 124 perturbation settings and an extensive dataset
comprising 1,000 long video sequences and nearly 2 million image-depth pairs, our tool offers
unmatched diversity and controllability. Researchers can create highly customized and challenging
test scenarios, exploring a wide range of real-world conditions and pushing the boundaries of SLAM
algorithms. This extensive collection of perturbations allows for a comprehensive assessment of
SLAM systems under diverse environmental conditions and sensor noise profiles.
Scalability and fair comparison. The large size of our dataset enables statistically significant
evaluations and fair comparisons between different SLAM algorithms under diverse conditions. This
scalability is crucial for robust benchmarking and identifying the strengths and weaknesses of various
approaches. By providing a large and diverse testing ground, our tool facilitates unbiased comparisons
and promotes the development of more reliable and generalizable SLAM solutions.
Decoupled perturbation study. Our pipeline facilitates the decoupled study of individual and
mixed perturbations, providing valuable insights into the isolated and combined effects of various
noise sources. This granular understanding is essential for developing targeted strategies to enhance
SLAM robustness in complex environments. By disentangling the impact of individual noise sources,
researchers can gain a deeper understanding of their specific effects on SLAM performance and
design algorithms resilient to specific types of perturbations.
Standardization. Our pipeline introduces a systematic and standardized approach to generating noisy
environments, ensuring consistency and reproducibility across different studies. This standardization
is crucial for facilitating meaningful comparisons and advancing the field of SLAM research. By
establishing a common framework for generating and evaluating SLAM datasets with perturbations,
our tool promotes collaboration and accelerates the progress of the entire research community.
These unique features position our benchmark tool as a valuable resource for the SLAM community.
By enabling comprehensive and standardized evaluations, our toolbox will accelerate the development
of robust SLAM algorithms capable of handling the complexities of real-world environments.
32

<!-- page 33 -->
No perturbation interquartile range (for reference)
No perturbation interquartile range (for reference)
9 types shows statistically significant
(p-value<0.01) performance degradation
12 types shows statistically significant
(p-value<0.01) performance degradation
Figure F: Effect of each RGB imaging perturbation type on the trajectory estimation performance of
SplaTAM-S [62] model, which shows the best overall performance under RGB imaging perturbations
among all the benchmark methods. The t-test [83] is performed to compare the performance
distribution between each perturbed setting and the perturbation-free setting (which is denoted as
None in the last column of each sub-figure). ∗∗and ∗indicate a significant distribution difference
between the pair at the 0.01 and 0.05 significance level, respectively.
D
More Results and Discussions
D.1
More Benchmarking Analyses
How well does the most robust SLAM model under RGB imaging perturbation, i.e., Splatam-S
perform? Even the top-performing SplaTAM-S model experiences a more substantial decrease in
trajectory estimation accuracy under dynamic conditions, with statistically significant differences
observed for most of the tested perturbation types (see Fig. F). Interestingly, increased brightness,
while slightly beneficial under static conditions, leads to significant errors under dynamic conditions
for SplaTAM-S.
Is there a correlation in the performance after perturbation among different image perturbation
types? In Fig. G, a strong correlation is observed in the combined perturbed performance vector of
all evaluated RGB-D SLAM models for the majority of perturbation types. This finding suggests that
the models’ performance remains consistent across certain perturbation scenarios. Additionally, the
correlation suggests the presence of underlying similarities in the effects of some sub-categories of
image perturbation types, e.g., noise effects.
Is there a correlation in the performance under RGB image perturbation among different methods?
In Fig. H, a weak correlation is observed in the combined perturbed performance vector, which
encompasses sixteen image perturbation types across six SLAM models with the RGB-D input
setting. This suggests a large divergence in the distribution of perturbed performance among the
different SLAM models.
How do image perturbations influence the mapping quality? We follow the mapping quality
evaluation protocol in [53] to assess 3D reconstruction using Accuracy (ACC) [cm], Completion
(Comp.) [cm], and Completion Ratio (Comp. R.) [%] with a 5 cm threshold. Table D details the
definition for each of these metrics. Note that only certain dense SLAM models can produce 3D
reconstruction results for further evaluation of mapping quality. In Fig. E, we evaluate the impact
of image perturbations on the mapping quality of the CO-SLAM [53] model, which shows a strong
robustness to most of the image-level corruptions. The results reveal a direct correlation between
perturbation severity and both 3D reconstruction error and completion error. Specifically, the clean
setting achieves the highest accuracy (2.08 cm) and the lowest completeness score (2.17 cm), while
the high perturbation severity setting exhibits the highest errors in ACC (2.39 cm) and completion
33

<!-- page 34 -->
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
1.00
0.81
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.71
0.54
0.71
0.83
0.60
0.94
0.77
0.77
0.81
1.00
0.99
0.99
0.90
0.90
0.90
0.99
0.75
0.55
0.75
0.90
0.81
0.90
0.99
0.99
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.71
0.75
0.83
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.83
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.60
0.60
0.83
0.83
0.54
0.55
0.66
0.66
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.66
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.83
0.37
0.37
0.66
0.66
0.71
0.75
0.83
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.83
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.60
0.60
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.90
0.94
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.77
0.94
0.94
0.60
0.81
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.60
0.37
0.60
0.77
1.00
0.66
0.83
0.83
0.94
0.90
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.60
0.37
0.60
0.77
0.66
1.00
0.83
0.83
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.77
0.99
1.00
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
1.00
0.83
0.66
0.83
0.94
0.83
0.83
1.00
1.00
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
Motion_Blur
Defocus_Blur
Gaussian_Blur
Glass_Blur
Gaussian_Noise
Shot_Noise
Impulse_Noise
Speckle_Noise
Fog
Frost
Snow
Spatter
Brightness
Contrast
Jpeg_Compression
Pixelate
1.00
0.60
0.54
0.60
0.66
0.66
0.66
0.64
0.60
0.54
0.83
0.66
0.66
0.71
0.60
0.60
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.54
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.93
0.77
0.83
0.49
0.89
0.94
0.89
0.94
0.94
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.64
0.99
0.93
0.99
0.99
0.99
0.99
1.00
0.90
0.84
0.64
0.99
0.84
0.90
0.99
0.99
0.60
0.83
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.90
1.00
0.94
0.83
0.94
0.60
0.66
0.83
0.83
0.54
0.77
0.83
0.77
0.89
0.89
0.89
0.84
0.94
1.00
0.77
0.89
0.66
0.60
0.77
0.77
0.83
0.54
0.49
0.54
0.71
0.71
0.71
0.64
0.83
0.77
1.00
0.71
0.43
0.49
0.54
0.54
0.66
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
1.00
0.99
0.94
0.89
0.71
1.00
0.77
0.83
0.94
0.94
0.66
0.89
0.94
0.89
0.77
0.77
0.77
0.84
0.60
0.66
0.43
0.77
1.00
0.94
0.89
0.89
0.71
0.94
0.89
0.94
0.83
0.83
0.83
0.90
0.66
0.60
0.49
0.83
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.60
1.00
0.94
1.00
0.94
0.94
0.94
0.99
0.83
0.77
0.54
0.94
0.89
0.94
1.00
1.00
0.5
0.6
0.7
0.8
0.9
1.0
Figure G: Correlation of perturbed performance (ATE) of multi-modal (RGB-D) SLAM models
across different image perturbation types under static (Left) and dynamic (Right) perturbation
mode. The pair-wise correlation strength is quantified via Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient [84].
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
1.00
0.09 -0.26 -0.10 0.37 -0.12
0.09
1.00 -0.12 -0.16 -0.32 -0.12
-0.26 -0.12 1.00
0.32
0.29 -0.12
-0.10 -0.16 0.32
1.00
0.59
0.68
0.37 -0.32 0.29
0.59
1.00
0.40
-0.12 -0.12 -0.12 0.68
0.40
1.00
0.2
0.0
0.2
0.4
0.6
0.8
1.0
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
ORBSLAM3
iMAP
Nice-SLAM
CO-SLAM
GO-SLAM
SplaTAM-S
1.00 -0.27 -0.49 -0.35 0.07 -0.10
-0.27 1.00 -0.23 0.74
0.34
0.29
-0.49 -0.23 1.00
0.10
0.01
0.11
-0.35 0.74
0.10
1.00
0.47
0.42
0.07
0.34
0.01
0.47
1.00
0.24
-0.10 0.29
0.11
0.42
0.24
1.00
0.25
0.00
0.25
0.50
0.75
1.00
Figure H: Correlation of perturbed performance (ATE) across different multi-modal (RGB-D)
SLAM models under static (Left) and dynamic (Right) image perturbation. The pair-wise correlation
strength is quantified via Spearman’s rank correlation coefficient [84].
(2.89 cm). Overall, our analysis shows that increasing severity levels of perturbation lead to larger
errors in the reconstructed 3D map.
34

<!-- page 35 -->
Table D: Definitions of 3D metrics for evaluation of mesh reconstruction quality of the recon-
structed 3D mesh P when given the ground-truth 3D mesh Q (in the scale of meter [m]). We follows
the 3D reconstruction metrics defined in the CO-SLAM [53] paper.
3D Reconstruction Metric
Definition
Accuracy (ACC)
1
|P |
P
p∈P
 minq∈Q ||p −q||2
Completion (Comp.)
1
|Q|
P
q∈Q
 minp∈P ||p −q||2
Completion Ratio (Comp. R.)
1
|Q|
P
q∈Q
 minp∈P ||p −q||2 ≤0.05

Table E: Effects of RGB imaging perturbation on 3d reconstruction (mapping) quality for
CO-SLAM [53] model.
Metrics
Clean
Low
Middle
High
Perturb.
Mean
Severity
Severity
Severity
Mean
ACC↓[cm]
2.08
2.11
2.12
2.39
2.21
Comp.↓[cm]
2.17
2.19
2.20
2.89
2.43
Comp. R.↑[%]
93.13
93.07
93.04
92.34
92.82
1) The setting with the best performance for each metric is in bold.
2) We compare the performance under no perturbation (clean) and
static image perturbations with different severity levels.
35

<!-- page 36 -->
PSNR: 29.10 
L1: ~0.00 
PSNR: 28.33 
L1: 0.01 
L1: 0.02 
Reconstruction
Failure
PSNR: 21.54 
Reconstruction
Failure
Original Speed (1×) 
Faster Motion (2×)
Ground-truth (for reference) 
Faster Motion (4×)
RGB Image
Depth Map
Figure I: Effect of faster motion on the 2D reconstruction losses of RGB images (Left) and depth
maps (Right), which are measured via PSNR and Depth L1 loss, for SplaTAM-S [62].
Figure J: Correlation between ATE (logarithm form) and the 2D reconstruction losses of RGB images
(Left) and depth maps (Right), which are used for model optimization, under faster motion effects
for SplaTAM-S [62]. Pearson correlation coefficient [85] is reported in the bottom-right corner.
D.2
More Discussions
There exists SLAM models that can perceive perturbed observations. We conduct a case study
to explore the ability of SplaTAM-S model to perceive the severity of perturbations. Notice that
SplaTAM-S optimizes the map and 3D pose by minimizing the 2D reconstruction loss for the RGB
and depth maps during inference. In Fig.I, we assess SplaTAM-S’s response to different severities of
faster motion perturbations. The results demonstrate that more severe perturbations lead to poorer
reconstruction quality of RGB-D images. Moreover, in Fig.J, we observe a strong correlation between
the accuracy of the final trajectory estimation and the RGB-D reconstruction loss. This indicates
that when the model produces a larger reconstruction loss for a certain sensor stream, it is likely
that the trajectory estimation is also inaccurate. While this doesn’t provide exact localization, it
serves as a valuable indicator of potential observation degradation and model failure. This suggests
SLAM systems could self-monitor performance using internal indicators, enabling real-time failure
mitigation in safety-critical applications.
In addition to the neural SLAM model SplaTAM-S [62], we explore the ability of the classical SLAM
model, i.e., ORB-SLAM3 [49], to ‘perceive’ perturbation severity. Specifically, we aim to explore
the correlation between the quality of ORB feature detection and the resulting overall performance.
In Fig. K, we present qualitative comparisons of the ORB feature detection results of ORB-SLAM3
under the influence of varying severity levels of Gaussian blur image-level perturbations. It is evident
that more severe perturbations result in a lower number of detected ORB features. In addition, Fig.L
depicts the correlation between the number of (detected or matched) ORB feature descriptors and
the accuracy of trajectory estimation. With increasing severity levels, a noticeable reduction in the
number of ORB features is observed, accompanied by a subsequent rise in trajectory estimation error,
i.e., ATE. This trend indicates that the deterioration of detected feature descriptors could serve as
36

<!-- page 37 -->
Original Clean Image
ATE RMSE: 0.00278
# ORB Feature: 1005
Gaussian Blur (Low Severity) 
Gaussian Blur (Mid Severity) 
Gaussian Blur (High Severity) 
ATE RMSE: 0.00295 
# ORB Feature: 1004
ATE RMSE: 0.00630 
# ORB Feature: 965
ATE RMSE: 0.04496 
# ORB Feature: 445
Figure K: Effect of Gaussian Blur image-level perturbation under different severity (Top) on
the quality of detected ORB features (Bottom), which are marked as green dots, for the classical
SLAM model ORB-SLAM3 [49]. We report the average trajectory accuracy via ATE RMSE and the
average number of ORB features detected in various perturbed settings.
400
500
600
700
800
900
1000
Average Detected ORB Feature Number
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Log (ATE RMSE)
Correlation: -0.48
Severity
Low
Middle
High
150
200
250
300
350
400
Average Tracked ORB Feature Number
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
Log (ATE RMSE)
Correlation: -0.47
Severity
Low
Middle
High
Figure L: Correlation between trajectory estimation accuracy and the average number of
detected (Left) and tracked (Right) ORB features for ORB-SLAM3 [49] model (RGB-D setting)
under different severity level of Gaussian Blur image-level perturbation. We report the Pearson
correlation coefficient [85] at the bottom right corner. While the correlation coefficient does not
indicate a significant linear correlation, there is a noticeable trend of increased trajectory estimation
when fewer ORB features are detected or tracked.
an informative indicator for identifying degraded and anomalous observations. Furthermore, it has
the potential to provide a rough estimation of the overall performance of ORB-SLAM3 in situations
where ground-truth annotation is unavailable.
37

<!-- page 38 -->
E
Qualitative Results
E.1
Qualitative Results of SLAM Model Performance under Perturbations
This section presents qualitative results of trajectory estimation and 3D reconstruction in SLAM
models, highlighting both successful and failure cases under specific perturbations.
ORB-SLAM3. Fig. M demonstrates the resilience of the ORB-SLAM3 [49] model to certain image
corruptions, e.g., brightness changing and defocus blur. However, we observed that noise-related
perturbations can cause the failure of ORB feature detection of the ORB-SLAM3 model, resulting in
complete loss of tracking, as depicted in Fig. N.
Nice-SLAM. Fig. O showcases the 3D reconstruction and trajectory estimation results of the Nice-
SLAM [55] model under varying levels of shot noise perturbation on the RGB image. Nice-SLAM
consistently produces high-quality geometry reconstructions even when subjected to high severity
levels of shot noise, which we attribute to the nearly error-free, unperturbed depth map aiding
geometry reconstruction. However, we observe that the model struggles to accurately predict and
reconstruct appearance details. Consequently, as the noise in the RGB images intensifies, color
reconstruction quality diminishes. Furthermore, Fig. P highlights the complete failure of the Nice-
SLAM model in reconstructing 3D geometry and maintaining tracking under rapid motion.
SplaTAM-S. Fig. Q presents the qualitative results of the SplaTAM-S [62] model under different
severity levels of motion blur image-level perturbations. The trajectory estimation reveals that, in the
absence of perturbation or with low levels of motion blur, the model produces smooth trajectories.
However, as perturbation severity increases to a moderate or high level, the predicted trajectory
exhibits more deviations. Notably, the 3D reconstruction consistently maintains high quality despite
the increasing blurring caused by observation degradation. In addition, Fig.R and Fig.S depict failure
instances of the SplaTAM-S [62] model. These failures occur when subjected to varying levels of
contrast decrease image-level perturbation under both static and dynamic perturbation modes. Higher
severity levels of perturbation result in complete tracking loss and reconstruction failure.
To provide a better viewing experience, we kindly refer you to the video demo.
E.2
Video Demo
We provide a video demo on YouTube (https://youtu.be/jNM94naSPXA) showcasing the
visualization of synthesized noisy data for evaluating SLAM robustness, including both sensor and
trajectory perturbations. The video also displays qualitative per-frame prediction results, such as
trajectory estimation and 3D reconstruction, of advanced SLAM models under these perturbations,
highlighting both successful and failed cases.
38

<!-- page 39 -->
Figure M: Qualitative results of the successful cases of ORB-SLAM3 model [49] with RGB-D
input.
Figure N: Qualitative results of the failure cases of ORB-SLAM3 model [49] with RGB-D input.
39

<!-- page 40 -->
Poor appearance reconstruction.
Good geometry reconstruction.
Figure O: Qualitative results of successful cases of Nice-SLAM model [55] with RGB-D input.
Figure P: Qualitative results of the failure cases of Nice-SLAM model [55] with RGB-D input.
40

<!-- page 41 -->
More deviated trajectory prediction
More deviated trajectory prediction
Smoother trajectory prediction
Smoother trajectory prediction
Estimated Trajectory
Camera Pose
Figure Q: Qualitative results of successful cases of SplaTAM-S model [62] with RGB-D input.
41

<!-- page 42 -->
Estimated Trajectory
Camera Pose
Fail to track and reconstruct!
Figure R: Qualitative results of the failure cases of SplaTAM-S model [55] with RGB-D input.
42

<!-- page 43 -->
Fail to track and reconstruct!
Fail to track and reconstruct!
Estimated Trajectory
Camera Pose
Figure S: Qualitative results of the failure cases of SplaTAM-S model [55] with RGB-D input.
43

<!-- page 44 -->
F
Potential Other Directions to Explore
Towards more robust and deployable SLAM, we present additional potential research avenues:
Robustness evaluation in unbounded 3D scene. Our work does not encompass the robustness
of SLAM systems in unbounded scenes, such as outdoor environments [21, 57]. Investigating the
robustness of SLAM systems in such scenarios holds significant potential for future research. It
can contribute to a better understanding of the practical applicability and generalizability of SLAM
systems in complex scenes.
Computationally-efficient robustness evaluation. Our findings have identified discernible indicators
within certain SLAM models that can reflect degraded observations, i.e., the reconstruction quality of
RGB images and depth maps for the SplaTAM-S [62] model. Future research could explore leveraging
and designing robustness indicators to evaluate the robustness of SLAM systems more efficiently. By
incorporating such indicators, we have the potential to enable unsupervised performance evaluation
of SLAM, especially in scenarios where obtaining ground-truth annotations is challenging or costly.
Real-world robustness evaluation. While our work primarily focuses on synthesis-based robust-
ness analysis, we recognize the value of real-world verification and validation for SLAM systems.
Conducting extensive field tests in more challenging environments [2], where SLAM systems are
subjected to agile locomotion types [1], would provide empirical validation of simulation results and
uncover additional challenges. This real-world evaluation would bridge the gap between simulated
environments and actual deployment conditions, ensuring the practical reliability and robustness of
SLAM systems.
G
Social Impact
The proposed pipeline for noisy data synthesis and the Noisy-Replica benchmark have the potential
to advance the development of robust Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) systems.
By enabling the evaluation of SLAM models under diverse perturbations, this work can facilitate
the creation of more resilient robotic systems capable of operating reliably in unstructured and
challenging environments. On the positive side, robust SLAM systems could enhance safety, ef-
ficiency, and effectiveness in various domains, such as autonomous navigation, exploration, and
mapping in hazardous or inaccessible areas. These applications span industries like disaster response,
construction, mining, and search and rescue operations, where reliable robotic operation is crucial.
However, it is essential to acknowledge potential negative implications. The synthesized perturbations
and noisy environments, while designed to evaluate robustness, might not fully capture the complexi-
ties of real-world scenarios. Overreliance on these simulated environments could lead to overlooking
unforeseen challenges, highlighting the importance of complementing simulations with real-world
testing and validation. Furthermore, while we have curated a diverse set of perturbations, inherent
biases or blindspots in the perturbation taxonomy or synthesis process may exist. We emphasize the
need for continuous refinement and expansion of the perturbation taxonomy to capture a broader
range of real-world disturbances and mitigate potential biases. Additionally, the potential for unethical
misuse of robust SLAM systems should be considered. Manipulated or biased data could be used to
construct environments that present a distorted view of reality, leading to erroneous decision-making
or harmful consequences. To mitigate this risk, robust validation, fact-checking mechanisms, and
adherence to ethical guidelines must be integrated into the development and deployment processes.
44

<!-- page 45 -->
H
Availability and Maintenance
The code and datasets utilized in this study are publicly accessible. The project repository, SLAM-
under-Perturbation, contains the following resources:
• Robustness Benchmark: The repository includes code for SLAM robustness evaluation
under customized perturbations.
• Baseline Models: Detailed instructions are provided for running all baseline models,
facilitating the reproduction of all results presented in this paper.
• Experiment Reproduction: Comprehensive guidelines for reproducing all experiments can
be found in the Instructions.md file within the repository.
These resources ensure that researchers and practitioners can effectively utilize and extend the work
presented in this study.
We encourage the community to propose more robust SLAM models to further advance the frontier
of robust embodied agents, ensuring their safe and reliable deployment in real-world environments.
I
License
The benchmark and code are under the Apache License 2.0. Please refer to https://github.
com/Xiaohao-Xu/SLAM-under-Perturbation/blob/main/LICENSE for details.
J
Public Resources Used
We gratefully acknowledge the use of the following public resources in this work:
• Classification-Robustness1 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .Apache License 2.0
• Replica2 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Research-only License
• Nice-SLAM3 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Apache License 2.0
• Co-SLAM4 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Apache License 2.0
• SplaTAM5 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . BSD 3-Clause "New" or "Revised" License
• GO-SLAM6 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . Apache License 2.0
• ORB-SLAM37 . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . GNU General Public License v3.0
1https://github.com/hendrycks/robustness
2https://github.com/facebookresearch/Replica-Dataset.
3https://github.com/cvg/nice-slam.
4https://github.com/HengyiWang/Co-SLAM.
5https://github.com/spla-tam/SplaTAM.
6https://github.com/youmi-zym/GO-SLAM.
7https://github.com/UZ-SLAMLab/ORB_SLAM3.
45

<!-- page 46 -->
K
Detailed Benchmarking Tables
To mitigate potential randomness, for each perturbed setting, we conduct each experiment three
times on eight 3D scenes (totaling 24 experiments per perturbed result) and report the averaged
results. Specifically, for the RGB imaging perturbation, we present the averaged result across three
severity levels, under both static and dynamic perturbation modes. This approach reduces the impact
of randomness while maintaining computational efficiency, striking a balance between mitigating
randomness and ensuring feasibility.
To facilitate future quantitative comparison on our benchmark, we have provided additional detailed
benchmarking tables of RGB-D SLAM methods in this section, which includes:
• Neural SLAM methods under depth imaging perturbation (Table F).
• Neural SLAM methods under the faster motion effect (Table G).
• Neural SLAM methods under motion deviations (Table H).
• Neural SLAM methods under RGB-D de-synchronization (Table I).
• Classical SLAM method ORB-SLAM3 under RGB imaging perturbation (Table J,Table K,
Table L).
• Classical SLAM method ORB-SLAM3 under depth imaging perturbation (Table M, Table N,
Table O).
• Classical SLAM method ORB-SLAM3 under the faster motion effect (Table P, Table Q,
Table R).
• Classical SLAM method ORB-SLAM3 under the motion deviations (Table S, Table T,
Table U ).
• Classical SLAM method ORB-SLAM3 under RGB-D de-synchronization (Table V, Table W,
Table X).
Furthermore, we have noticed large performance deviations with each perturbed setting for the
ORB-SLAM3 model. To reflect potential randomness, we have included the performance standard
deviation of this model in our experiment results. We acknowledge these potential performance
deviations, which indicate low model robustness – a phenomenon our work aims to highlight to
encourage the SLAM community to develop more robust and stable SLAM systems.
Table F: Trajectory estimation error (ATE [m]) under depth imaging perturbation for RGB-D SLAM
methods.
Method
Clean
Gaussian
Edge
Random
Range
Noise
Erosion
Missing
Clipping
iMAP (RGB-D) [54]
0.1209
0.0307
0.1083
0.2438
Nice-SLAM (RGB-D) [55]
0.0147
0.0149
0.0154
0.1183
CO-SLAM (RGB-D) [53]
0.0090
0.5794
0.0096
0.0094
0.0122
GO-SLAM (RGB-D) [56]
0.0046
0.0378
0.0046
0.0046
0.0045
SplaTAM-S (RGB-D) [62]
0.0045
0.0042
0.0042
0.0048
indicates completely unacceptable, i.e., performance (ATE ≥1.0 [m])
46

<!-- page 47 -->
Table G: Trajectory estimation error (ATE [m]) of monocular (Top) and RGB-D (Bottom) SLAM
under faster motion.
Speed-up Ratio
1×
2×
4×
8×
GO-SLAM (Mono) [56]
0.0039
0.0042
0.0046
0.0048
iMAP (RGB-D) [54]
0.1209
0.4675
0.9445
1.0000
Nice-SLAM (RGB-D) [55]
0.0147
0.1702
1.0000
1.0000
CO-SLAM (RGB-D) [53]
0.0090
0.1062
0.9510
1.0000
GO-SLAM (RGB-D) [56]
0.0046
0.0046
0.0046
0.0050
SplaTAM-S (RGB-D) [62]
0.0045
0.0184
1.0000
1.0000
Table H: Trajectory estimation error (ATE [m]) of Neural SLAM methods under motion deviations.
Rotate [deg]
Clean
0
1
3
5
Translate [m]
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
GO-SLAM (Mono) [56]
0.0039 0.0084 0.0077 0.0091 0.0083 0.0079 0.0082 0.0094
iMAP (RGB-D) [54]
0.1209 0.0334 0.1386 0.0442 0.2438 0.2135 0.3754 0.2801
Nice-SLAM (RGB-D) [55] 0.0147 0.5812
CO-SLAM (RGB-D) [53]
0.0090 0.0420 0.0848 0.3087 0.4579 0.5069 0.2998 0.5040 0.6443 0.6630 0.7532 0.5772 0.8457 0.7966 0.8277
GO-SLAM (RGB-D) [56]
0.0046 0.0082 0.0082 0.0081 0.0080 0.0080 0.0078 0.0077
SplaTAM-S (RGB-D) [62]
0.0045 0.0545 0.0980 0.2964 0.297F 0.2272 0.2313
Notation F represents settings that include failure sequences where no final trajectory is generated due to tracking loss. The number in front of F represents the
average ATE as failure sequences are set as a value of 1.0. Notation
indicates completely unacceptable trajectory estimation performance, i.e., ATE ≥1.0 [m].
Table I: Trajectory estimation error (ATE [m]) under sensor de-synchronization for RGB-D SLAM
methods.
Method
Clean
Static Mode
Dynamic Mode
∆= 0
∆= 5
∆= 10
∆= 20
∆= 5
∆= 10
∆= 20
iMAP (RGB-D) [54]
0.1209
0.4672
0.5344
0.6345
0.5104
0.6803
0.6745
Nice-SLAM (RGB-D) [55]
0.0147
0.3820
0.4062
0.5216
0.5433
0.5548
0.7020
CO-SLAM (RGB-D) [53]
0.0090
0.0520
0.1005
0.1939
0.0740
0.1164
0.2108
GO-SLAM (RGB-D) [56]
0.0046
0.0148
0.0292
0.0646
0.0151
0.0297
0.0650
SplaTAM-S (RGB-D) [62]
0.0045
0.0554
0.0629
0.0880
0.0402
0.0645
0.0850
∆denotes the misaligned frame interval between RGB and depth streams.
47

<!-- page 48 -->
Table J: ATE metric of trajectory estimation under RGB imaging perturbations for ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Perturb.
Input
Clean
Blur Effect
Noise Effect
Environmental Interference
Post-processing Effect
Mode
Modality
Motion Defocus Gaussian Glass Gaussian
Shot
Impulse Speckle
Fog
Frost
Snow Spatter Bright Contra. JPEG Pixelate
Static
Mono
0.014
0.891
0.535
0.505
0.797
0.917
0.969
1.000
0.923
0.629
0.917
1.000
0.719
0.027
0.612
0.173
0.768
±0.028 ±0.285 ±0.487
±0.506 ±0.404
±0.281 ±0.152 ±0.000 ±0.261 ±0.490 ±0.280 ±0.000 ±0.449 ±0.059 ±0.478 ±0.325 ±0.410
RGB-D
0.082
0.300
0.340
0.292
0.211
0.470
0.433
0.591
0.351
0.397
0.640
0.795
0.508
0.065
0.527
0.132
0.703
±0.179 ±0.365 ±0.408
±0.425 ±0.335
±0.498 ±0.490 ±0.494 ±0.469 ±0.480 ±0.474 ±0.409 ±0.503 ±0.142 ±0.492 ±0.191 ±0.354
Dynamic
Mono
0.014
0.876
0.506
0.760
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.885
0.751
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.052
1.000
0.166
0.718
±0.028 ±0.351 ±0.528
±0.445 ±0.000
±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.325 ±0.461 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.092 ±0.000 ±0.341 ±0.412
RGB-D
0.082
0.279
0.303
0.052
0.168
0.508
0.513
0.755
0.262
0.659
0.256
0.876
0.753
0.066
0.751
0.645
0.756
±0.179 ±0.330 ±0.435
±0.080 ±0.245
±0.526 ±0.520 ±0.453 ±0.455 ±0.476 ±0.459 ±0.352 ±0.458 ±0.145 ±0.462 ±0.491 ±0.294
Table K: RPE metric of trajectory estimation under RGB imaging perturbations for ORB-
SLAM3 [49].
Perturb.
Input
Clean
Blur Effect
Noise Effect
Environmental Interference
Post-processing Effect
Mode
Modality
Motion Defocus Gaussian Glass Gaussian
Shot
Impulse Speckle
Fog
Frost
Snow Spatter Bright Contra. JPEG Pixelate
Static
Mono
0.197
0.853
0.605
0.601
0.811
0.927
0.960
0.100
0.932
0.680
0.927
1.000
0.760
0.162
0.699
0.247
0.525
±0.030 ±0.335 ±0.408
±0.410 ±0.376
±0.247 ±0.194 ±0.000 ±0.230 ±0.423 ±0.246 ±0.000 ±0.383 ±0.028 ±0.373 ±0.294 ±0.485
RGB-D
0.114
0.238
0.323
0.329
0.084
0.493
0.445
0.601
0.377
0.421
0.617
0.798
0.529
0.078
0.570
0.080
0.032
±0.023 ±0.350 ±0.400
±0.397 ±0.036
±0.477 ±0.479 ±0.482 ±0.450 ±0.459 ±0.470 ±0.403 ±0.481 ±0.022 ±0.442 ±0.028 ±0.026
Dynamic
Mono
0.197
0.879
0.572
0.782
1.000
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.899
0.785
1.000
1.000
1.000
0.144
1.000
0.242
0.287
±0.030 ±0.342 ±0.459
±0.403 ±0.000
±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.284 ±0.398 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.034 ±0.000 ±0.307 ±0.440
RGB-D
0.114
0.043
0.293
0.033
0.046
0.517
0.523
0.755
0.284
0.642
0.272
0.876
0.758
0.074
0.792
0.656
0.031
±0.023 ±0.024 ±0.437
±0.027 ±0.021
±0.517 ±0.511 ±0.453 ±0.443 ±0.494 ±0.450 ±0.350 ±0.448 ±0.016 ±0.393 ±0.474 ±0.011
Table L: Success rate (SR) of pose tracking under RGB imaging perturbations for ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Perturb.
Input
Clean
Blur Effect
Noise Effect
Environmental Interference
Post-processing Effect
Mode
Modality
Motion Defocus Gaussian Glass Gaussian
Shot
Impulse Speckle
Fog
Frost
Snow Spatter Bright Contra. JPEG Pixelate
Static
Mono
0.854
0.059
0.331
0.382
0.122
0.055
0.016
0.000
0.052
0.229
0.057
0.000
0.211
0.915
0.320
0.712
0.064
±0.149 ±0.152 ±0.385
±0.415 ±0.307
±0.186 ±0.076 ±0.000 ±0.183 ±0.362 ±0.197 ±0.000 ±0.352 ±0.142 ±0.405 ±0.349 ±0.089
RGB-D
0.960
0.621
0.606
0.617
0.778
0.388
0.391
0.219
0.443
0.276
0.111
0.081
0.259
0.971
0.412
0.818
0.361
±0.046 ±0.423 ±0.443
±0.430 ±0.319
±0.468 ±0.475 ±0.409 ±0.457 ±0.421 ±0.282 ±0.236 ±0.405 ±0.030 ±0.461 ±0.284 ±0.232
Dynamic
Mono
0.854
0.008
0.267
0.158
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.096
0.169
0.000
0.000
0.000
0.904
0.000
0.703
0.142
±0.149 ±0.270 ±0.000
±0.022 ±0.000
±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.273 ±0.315 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.000 ±0.046 ±0.000 ±0.328 ±0.168
RGB-D
0.960
0.871
0.354
0.301
0.991
0.207
0.277
0.040
0.303
0.027
0.005
0.000
0.009
0.975
0.003
0.376
0.432
±0.046 ±0.364 ±0.429
±0.437 ±0.081
±0.378 ±0.473 ±0.084 ±0.441 ±0.045 ±0.009 ±0.000 ±0.026 ±0.027 ±0.007 ±0.519 ±0.218
Table M: ATE metric of trajectory estimation under depth perturbations for ORB-SLAM3 [49] with
RGB-D input.
Clean
Gaussian
Edge
Random
Range
Noise
Erosion
Missing
Clipping
0.082 ± 0.179
0.803 ± 0.301
0.807 ± 0.365
0.756 ± 0.397
0.994 ± 0.283
Table N: RPE metric of trajectory estimation under depth perturbations for ORB-SLAM3 [49] with
RGB-D input.
Clean
Gaussian
Edge
Random
Range
Noise
Erosion
Missing
Clipping
0.114 ± 0.023
0.064 ± 0.018
0.154 ± 0.342
0.054 ± 0.022
0.047 ± 0.017
Table O: Success rate (SR) of pose tracking under depth perturbations for ORB-SLAM3 [49] with
RGB-D input.
Clean
Gaussian
Edge
Random
Range
Noise
Erosion
Missing
Clipping
0.960 ± 0.046
0.421 ± 0.331
0.379 ± 0.281
0.322 ± 0.354
0.286 ± 0.181
48

<!-- page 49 -->
Table P: ATE metric of trajectory estimation under the faster motion perturbation for ORB-
SLAM3 [49].
Speed-up Ratio
1×
2×
4×
8×
Monocular
0.014 ± 0.028
0.009 ± 0.009
0.023 ± 0.051
0.023 ± 0.053
RGB-D
0.082 ± 0.179
0.019 ± 0.023
0.064 ± 0.156
0.077 ± 0.125
Table Q: RPE metric of trajectory estimation under the faster motion perturbation for ORB-
SLAM3 [49].
Speed-up Ratio
1×
2×
4×
8×
Monocular
0.197 ± 0.030
0.194 ± 0.035
0.227 ± 0.035
0.289 ± 0.064
RGB-D
0.114 ± 0.023
0.152 ± 0.032
0.190 ± 0.030
0.268 ± 0.059
Table R: Success rate (SR) of pose tracking under the faster motion perturbation for ORB-
SLAM3 [49].
Speed-up Ratio
1×
2×
4×
8×
Monocular
0.854 ± 0.149
0.893 ± 0.081
0.909 ± 0.049
0.837 ± 0.115
RGB-D
0.960 ± 0.046
0.964 ± 0.012
0.938 ± 0.029
0.866 ± 0.129
Table S: ATE metric of trajectory estimation under motion deviations for ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Rotate [deg]
Clean
0
1
3
5
Translate [m]
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
Monocular
0.014
0.017
0.136
0.190
0.063
0.146
0.348
0.200
0.170
0.055
0.053
0.061
0.073
0.023
0.041
0.080
±0.028 ±0.027 ±0.349 ±0.339 ±0.047 ±0.196 ±0.378 ±0.355 ±0.338 ±0.057 ±0.061 ±0.061 ±0.135 ±0.039 ±0.042 ±0.108
RGB-D
0.082
0.191
0.085
0.171
0.059
0.163
0.084
0.228
0.148
0.090
0.158
0.085
0.164
0.072
0.050
0.062
±0.179 ±0.369 ±0.174 ±0.337 ±0.067 ±0.280 ±0.052 ±0.361 ±0.210 ±0.072 ±0.106 ±0.037 ±0.340 ±0.100 ±0.054 ±0.076
Table T: RPE metric of trajectory estimation under motion deviations for ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Rotate [deg]
Clean
0
1
3
5
Translate [m]
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
Monocular
0.197
0.191
0.291
0.297
0.182
0.194
0.291
0.197
0.349
0.231
0.265
0.235
0.355
0.324
0.368
0.371
±0.030 ±0.037 ±0.289 ±0.297 ±0.071 ±0.036 ±0.294 ±0.075 ±0.270 ±0.086 ±0.105 ±0.087 ±0.052 ±0.083 ±0.067 ±0.040
RGB-D
0.114
0.229
0.119
0.208
0.114
0.116
0.153
0.231
0.197
0.220
0.203
0.220
0.417
0.313
0.298
0.334
±0.023 ±0.313 ±0.028 ±0.322 ±0.039 ±0.038 ±0.046 ±0.313 ±0.046 ±0.027 ±0.035 ±0.026 ±0.239 ±0.047 ±0.052 ±0.042
Table U: Success rate (SR) of pose tracking under motion deviations for ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Rotate [deg]
Clean
0
1
3
5
Translate [m]
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
0
0.0125
0.025
0.05
Monocular
0.854
0.489
0.247
0.128
0.662
0.340
0.221
0.120
0.373
0.096
0.087
0.059
0.413
0.155
0.214
0.144
±0.149 ±0.107 ±0.129 ±0.091 ±0.329 ±0.189 ±0.156 ±0.069 ±0.329 ±0.154 ±0.081 ±0.056 ±0.418 ±0.160 ±0.112 ±0.039
RGB-D
0.960
0.462
0.321
0.152
0.596
0.345
0.228
0.114
0.325
0.259
0.146
0.118
0.422
0.158
0.180
0.129
±0.046 ±0.213 ±0.085 ±0.100 ±0.491 ±0.218 ±0.151 ±0.115 ±0.270 ±0.226 ±0.121 ±0.087 ±0.428 ±0.156 ±0.148 ±0.092
49

<!-- page 50 -->
Table V: ATE Metric under sensor de-synchronization for RGBD-based ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Perturb
Clean
Misaligned Frame Interval (∆)
Mode
∆= 0
∆= 5
∆= 10
∆= 20
Static
0.082 ± 0.179
0.069 ± 0.168
0.066 ± 0.154
0.065 ± 0.163
Dynamic
0.070 ± 0.157
0.077 ± 0.161
0.083 ± 0.178
Table W: RPE metric under sensor de-synchronization for RGBD-based ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Perturb
Clean
Misaligned Frame Interval (∆)
Mode
∆= 0
∆= 5
∆= 10
∆= 20
Static
0.114 ± 0.023
0.123 ± 0.024
0.114 ± 0.024
0.115 ± 0.023
Dynamic
0.116 ± 0.025
0.112 ± 0.019
0.117 ± 0.027
Table X: Success rate (SR) of pose tracking under sensor de-synchronization for RGBD-based
ORB-SLAM3 [49].
Perturb
Clean
Misaligned Frame Interval (∆)
Mode
∆= 0
∆= 5
∆= 10
∆= 20
Static
0.960 ± 0.046
0.960 ± 0.036
0.958 ± 0.029
0.954 ± 0.030
Dynamic
0.955 ± 0.039
0.942 ± 0.050
0.948 ± 0.041
50
