<!-- page 1 -->
Neural Visibility Field for Uncertainty-Driven Active Mapping
Shangjie Xue
Jesse Dill
Pranay Mathur
Frank Dellaert
Panagiotis Tsiotras
Danfei Xu
Georgia Institute of Technology
{xsj, jdill33, pranay.mathur, frank.dellaert, tsiotras, danfei}@gatech.edu
Abstract
This paper presents Neural Visibility Field (NVF), a
novel uncertainty quantification method for Neural Radi-
ance Fields (NeRF) applied to active mapping. Our key
insight is that regions not visible in the training views lead
to inherently unreliable color predictions by NeRF at this
region, resulting in increased uncertainty in the synthesized
views. To address this, we propose to use Bayesian Networks
to composite position-based field uncertainty into ray-based
uncertainty in camera observations. Consequently, NVF nat-
urally assigns higher uncertainty to unobserved regions, aid-
ing robots to select the most informative next viewpoints.
Extensive evaluations show that NVF excels not only in un-
certainty quantification but also in scene reconstruction for
active mapping, outperforming existing methods. More de-
tails can be found at https://sites.google.com/
view/nvf-cvpr24/.
1. Introduction
Active 3D reconstruction plays a pivotal role in robotics. The
challenge lies in enabling the robot to precisely reconstruct a
target using the fewest views possible. Consider the example,
illustrated in Figure 1, where the agent’s objective is to thor-
oughly explore an unknown object (the Hubble telescope).
To achieve this, the robot assesses the uncertainty of poten-
tial views, choosing actions that significantly diminish this
uncertainty. A crucial aspect of this process is the represen-
tation of the scene. It should not only facilitate high-quality
reconstruction but also be cognizant of uncertainties.
Recently,
implicit
scene
representations,
notably
NeRF [31] have shown remarkable ability in high-quality
scene reconstructions. The result has motivated applying
NeRF for active reconstruction [34, 54, 57]. However, due
to the opaque nature of neural networks, estimating the
uncertainty of NeRF remains challenging. Previous works
have developed various proxy measurements to represent
the uncertainty in NeRF, in which they aim to maximize the
NeRF’s reconstruction accuracy and geometric faithfulness
to the scene. However, these approaches neglect a crucial
NeRF Rendering
Uncertainty Map
Uncertainty Map
NVF (Ours)
Prior Work 
NVF (Ours)
Prior Work 
Region Occluded in 
Training Views
Region Visible to
Training Views
Low 
Uncertainty
High 
Uncertainty
NeRF Rendering
Figure 1. Neural Visibility Field (NVF) is an uncertainty estimation
framework for NeRF that accounts for visibility: whether a region
is covered by the training views of a NeRF. Visible regions should
have low uncertainty (bottom row), and unobserved should have
high uncertainty (top row). In this paper, we show that many ex-
isting methods in NeRF uncertainty quantification can be viewed
as special cases of our framework, and NVF outperforms them
empirically in uncertainty quantification and active mapping tasks.
factor to optimize for, namely, visual coverage.
In active reconstruction, an agent makes a tradeoff be-
tween exploring new areas of a scene and revisiting previ-
ously explored ones. Since NeRF is a multiview reconstruc-
tion method, a natural strategy is to explore regions that have
not been observed by previous views and have these regions
hold a high degree of uncertainty. Surprisingly, prior methods
have largely failed to account for visibility and instead fo-
cus on estimating uncertainty via density or NeRF-predicted
position-based RGB variance. Another gap in prior research
is the integration of position-based uncertainty factors (e.g.,
emitted color, opacity, and visibility) into ray-based obser-
1
arXiv:2406.06948v2  [cs.CV]  15 Jun 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
vation uncertainty. Previous approaches typically employ a
simple (weighted) average or sum of position-based uncer-
tainties to approximate the observation uncertainty. However,
these methods often lack a solid theoretical foundation and
can underperform in complex scenarios.
To address these challenges, we propose Neural Visibility
Field (NVF). Our key insight is that if a region has never
been visible in the training views, the color prediction for
this point by NeRF is unreliable. To effectively integrate
this location-based uncertainty into ray-based camera ob-
servations, we view NeRF through the lens of a Bayesian
Network. Within this framework, the distribution of a color
along a ray can be interpreted as a Gaussian mixture Model.
Subsequently, we calculate the entropy of the GMM and em-
ploy it as a cost function, guiding the agent to select the next
best view for active mapping. We observed that all previous
methods can be interpreted as specific approximations within
our proposed theoretical framework, yet, they consistently
overlook a crucial aspect, namely, visibility.
Our evaluation of the proposed approach is multi-faceted
and spans a range of environments, encompassing objects, in-
door rooms, and spaces. We illustrate how our method offers
a superior metric for assessing uncertainty in NeRF. We also
apply our approach to active mapping tasks. Specifically,
we demonstrate that employing our metric in Next-Best-
View (NBV) planning facilitates the planning of trajectories
that not only enhance reconstruction quality but also maxi-
mize visual coverage of the scene. As a result, our proposed
method demonstrates significant improvements over these
prior approaches in experimental evaluations. To summarize,
our main contributions are:
• We propose a principled uncertainty estimation method
for NeRF that takes into account visibility, called Neural
Visibility Field (NVF).
• We provide a unified lens of prior methods in uncertainty
estimation for NeRF using NVF.
• We apply the NVF framework to active mapping tasks
demonstrating superior performance compared to the ex-
isting state-of-the-art methods.
2. Related Work
Active Mapping. Research on active mapping or NBV se-
lection is a long-studied problem [4, 37] with the goal of
searching for observation poses to create an optimal recon-
struction of an environment. Scott et al [42] categorizes these
approaches as model-based approaches, which utilize knowl-
edge of the geometry and appearance of a scene [11, 41],
and model-free approaches, which use information extracted
from data gathered online [2, 4, 37]. More relevant are view-
point selection strategies, including frontier-based [6, 9],
sampling-based [7, 12, 39], and uncertainty based [44, 45].
In particular, our method is inspired by the line of work
that uses probabilistic volumetric occupancy to facilitate vis-
ibility operations [16, 21], which employs the concept of
entropy to estimate uncertainty.
Implicit
Scene
Representation.
Implicit
neural
fields [29, 35, 53] represent 3D scenes as a continuous
differentiable signal parameterized via a neural network.
The seminal work of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) [30]
learns a density and a radiance field supervised by mul-
tiview 2D images. New views can be queried from a
trained NeRF through volumetric rendering. Along this
direction, significant progress has been made in novel
view rendering [28, 30, 49], 3D reconstruction [1, 23],
3D generation [17, 38] and videos [10, 24, 25, 36, 52].
Despite their success, the quality of representation hinges
on using a large number of well-posed images which limits
their applicability in real-time applications. To counter
these problems, recent work has focused on few-shot
neural rendering [3, 8, 33, 55], handling unknown or
noisy camera pose estimates [26, 51], using heuristic
camera placement strategy [20], or adding a notion of
uncertainty [18, 22, 27, 45] to quantify information gain for
next-best-view selection.
Uncertainty Estimation for NeRF. This work focuses
on quantifying the epistemic uncertainty of a NeRF model to
determine the next best view for improving its reconstruction.
Direct approaches such as ensemble-based methods [47] are
conceptually simple but computationally expensive or re-
quire prior data collection [14, 18]. Our method improves
upon and unifies a recent line of work [22, 34, 40, 45, 54, 57].
ActiveNerf [34] and NeurAR [40] model RGB color distri-
bution at a specific spatial point as a Gaussian distribution,
and directly use NeRF to predict its variance. However, the
predicted variance tends to be inaccurate in instances where
a region has never been visible from the training views. In
comparison, [22, 45, 54, 57] ignore the spatial RGB uncer-
tainty, and approximating the entropy through the probability
of occupancy by using NeRF’s density prediction. In partic-
ular, [22] treats the sampled points in volumetric rendering
that are displayed by pixels as discrete random variables and
computes the entropy based on it. In [54, 57], the entropy
is approximated by utilizing the probability of a ray being
occluded at a point. However, it is worth noting that a remain-
ing gap exists in all previous methods as they lack theoretical
grounding for bridging the position-based uncertainty or oc-
cupancy uncertainty with ray-based observation uncertainty.
In our work, we proposed a theoretically principled method
based on Bayesian Network to address this challenge. More-
over, a crucial aspect of uncertainty estimation is that if a
region is never visible by any of the previous views, the
NeRF prediction at this region is not reliable, and high un-
certainty should be associated with these regions, yet this
aspect is overlooked by all relevant previous works. Our pro-
posed theoretical framework enables us to properly model
this aspect through visibility, and all previous work could
2

<!-- page 3 -->
be viewed as special cases under our proposed framework
while lacking certain key aspects.
3. Method
Active mapping aims to reduce uncertainties in the recon-
structed map and achieve visual coverage of the entire scene.
This is achieved by assessing the current uncertainties in
the reconstructed map and predicting the potential informa-
tion gained from proposed viewpoints. However, the chal-
lenge arises when utilizing NeRF for active mapping. The
opaque and complex nature of neural networks presents sig-
nificant challenges for accurately quantifying uncertainty
within NeRF. Although several methods have been proposed
to approximate uncertainty in NeRF, they often lack a theoret-
ical foundation and may underperform in complex scenarios.
Our key insight is that if a region has never been visible
in the training views, the color prediction for this point by
NeRF is inherently unreliable. To effectively incorporate this
position-based uncertainty into camera observations, we pro-
pose to use a Bayesian network. This allows for the seamless
integration of uncertainty from the implicit field into the ob-
served image’s uncertainty. In this section, we will start with
a review of NeRF, followed by a detailed explanation of how
to model NeRF’s volume rendering process using a Bayesian
network. Subsequently, we will delve into the integration
of visibility aspects within the framework. Finally, we will
discuss the application of this framework to active mapping.
3.1. Problem Formulation
A NeRF [31] is defined as an implicit function  F
_
{\T he t a } :(\bm {x}, \bm {d})\rightarrow (\bm {c}, \sigma ) , where  \bm {x} represents the 3D position,  \
bm {d}=(\theta , \phi ) the viewing direction,  \bm {c} the emitted RGB color at  \bm {x} ,
and  \sigma the volume density at  \bm {x} . The volume density function
 \sigma (\bm {x}) is a differentiable measure of the probability that a ray
is occluded at position  \bm {x} . Considering a ray  \bm  { r }(t) = \bm {o} + t \bm {d} 
with near and far bounds  t_ n, t_f , the observed color at the
ray’s origin is given by:
 C(\ b m {
r
}
)  =
 \
exp \left (-\int _ {t_n
}
^{t
_f} T  (t
)
\
s i
gm
a (\bm {r
}(t))\bm {c}(\bm {r}(t), \bm {d}) \d t\right ) \label {eq:orig_vr2} \\ T(t) = \exp \left (-\int _{t_n}^{t} \sigma (\bm {r}(s)) \d s\right ) \label {eq:trans}
(2)
where T(t) is the transmission probability from  t_n to  t with-
out occlusion. Empirically, the algorithm approximates the
integral with N discrete samples {ti}N−1
i=0
along the ray,
where  t_0 denotes the ray’s origin where the camera is lo-
cated. Consequently, Eq. (1) becomes:
  \ha t
 
{
C}(\bm { r}) =  \ s um
 _i
 
w_i
 \ b m {c}(t_i) \text {, where } w_i = \alpha _i\prod _{j=0}^{i-1} (1-\alpha _i), \label {eq:orig_vr} 
(3)
where s_ i  = t _ {i+1} - t_i denotes the distance between two adja-
cent sampled points along the ray, \a l p h a _i = 1 -\exp (- s_i\sigma (t_i) )
is the alpha value in alpha composition, which can also be
viewed as the probability of occlusion at the ith point.
3.2. Volume Rendering as Bayesian Network
While NeRF synthesizes novel views, NeRF cannot estimate
the uncertainty in the views. We introduce a method that com-
posites position-based uncertainty into ray-based uncertainty
using a probabilistic graphical model. This framework en-
ables the integration of visibility factors into the uncertainty
estimation process (see Sec. 3.3). We consider the observed
color along a ray,  C(\bm {r}) , as a random variable instead of a
constant. In this subsection, we detail the computation of this
variable’s distribution by using a Bayesian network to model
the volume rendering process. We use a binary random vari-
able  D_i to denote whether the ray is occluded in the interval
 [t_ i, t_{i+1}] (Di = 1 for occluded, Di = 0 for transparent). The
continuous random variable  C_i then represents the emitted
color at  t_i in the direction  \bm {d} , and  \bm {Z}_i is a continuous random
variable for the observed color at  t_i . Here,  \bm {Z}_0 corresponds
to the camera’s observed color at the origin, and hence, the
goal is to compute p(z0). Notice that, although both Ci and
Zi represent colors, their difference lies in the objects they
represent: Ci represents the color distribution associated
with a specific position in R3, whereas Zi corresponds to the
color distribution of a camera observation, associated with
a particular ray. For simplicity, we omit the ray index \protect \bm  {r} for
D_i, \protect \bm  {C}_i, and \protect \bm  {Z}_i in Sections 3.2 and 3.3 below.
Note that the value of  \bm {Z}_i only depends on  D_i ,  \bm {C}_i , and
 \bm {Z}_{i+1} . Specifically, if the interval  [t_ i, t_{i+1}] occludes the ray,
 \bm {Z}_i assumes the emitted color  \bm {C}_i ; otherwise,  \bm {Z}_i equals  \bm {Z}_{i+1} ,
as the interval is transparent. The conditional probability
 p(\bm { z}_ i|D_i, \bm {c}_i, \bm {z}_{i+1}) is thus:
  p(\bm {z} _i|D_ i
,
 \bm  {c}_
i,  \ b m 
{z}_ { i+1}) 
= \begin {cases} \delta (\bm {z}_i - \bm {c}_i), & \text {if } D_i = 1, \\ \delta (\bm {z}_i - \bm {z}_{i+1}), & \text {otherwise,} \end {cases} \label {eq:condition} 
(4)
where δ(·) is the Dirac delta function. Thus, the volume
rendering process could be modeled as a hybrid Bayesian
network (illustration included in the Appendix). Moreover,
we can express the marginal probability of  \bm {z}_i using the
following recursion:
  p(\ b m {z}_i )  =  \alpha _i p(\bm {c}_i) + (1-\alpha _i) p(\bm {z}_{i+1}). \label {eq:recursive} 
(5)
Note that this formulation utilizes the relationship P(Di =
0) = 1 −αi = exp (−σisi). where  \alpha _i was previously de-
fined as the probability of occlusion at the ith point along
the ray. If we assume  p(\bm {c}_i) is a Gaussian distribution with
mean  \bm {\mu }_{\bm {c}_i} and covariance  \bm {Q}_{\bm {c}_i} , as predicted by the NeRF
model (see Sec. 3.4 for details), by using recursion Eq. (5),
the marginal probability of  \bm {z}_0 is computed as a Gaussian
mixture model (GMM):
  p(\ b
m
 
{z}_0) =  \sum _i w_i \mathcal {N}(\bm {\mu }_{\bm {c}_i}, \bm {Q}_{\bm {c}_i}), 
(6)
3

<!-- page 4 -->
Observed Views
sd
Scene
Camera
Reconstruction
NVF
Uncertainty Maps
argmax
Next Best View
Planning
NVF 
Training
(Sec 3.4)
Quantify 
Uncertainty
(Sec 3.5)
Generate Candidate 
Views (Sec 3.6)
Figure 2. Active Mapping with NVF. Starting with a small set of initial views, a trained NVF is used to quantify uncertainties among
sampled candidate views and chooses the view with maximum uncertainty as the next view to be observed by the agent.
with  w _ i 
= \a
lpha _i\prod _{j=1}^{i-1} (1-\alpha _i) . The distribution of the camera’s
observation,  p(\bm {z}_0) , implies that  E[\b m  
{ z}_0] = \sum _i w_i \bm {\mu }_{\bm {c}_i} which
aligns with the original NeRF’s volume rendering expression
(Eq. (3)).
So far, we have developed a framework based on a proba-
bilistic graphical model to bridge position-based uncertainty
with ray-based observational uncertainty. In the following
subsection, we will discuss the integration of the visibility
factor into this framework.
3.3. Uncertainty with Visibility
With the Bayesian network formulation, we can now add
visibility into the uncertainty estimation. Let a binary random
variable Vi represent whether point i is visible to any camera
in the training set. When a point is visible ( V _ i = 1 ), we
can rely on NeRF’s output for RGB and its variance. If a
point is unobserved ( V _ i = 0 ), the NeRF’s output at this point
becomes unreliable, and we assign a prior color distribution
 \mat hcal {N}(\bm {\mu }_0, \bm {Q}_0) to it, as follows:
  p (\bm  
{
c}_i |  V_i)
 =  \ b eg
in {c ases
} \mathcal {N}(\bm {\mu }_{\bm {c}_i}, \bm {Q}_{\bm {c}_i}), & \text {if } V_i=1, \\ \mathcal {N}(\bm {\mu }_{0}, \bm {Q}_{0}), & \text {otherwise.} \end {cases} \label {eq:pcv} 
(7)
Moreover, for invisible points, density prediction may also
lack accuracy. Therefore, we define the conditional probabil-
ity table for  P(D_i|V_i) as follows
  \begin {t
abular}{c| cc
}
 
\
multicolum
n  {1}{c}{} &
 
\m
u l ticolumn {2}{c}{Occlusion $D_i$} \\ Visibility $V_i$ & 1 & 0 \\ \midrule 1 & $\exp (-\sigma _i s_i)$ & $1- \exp (-\sigma _i s_i)$ \\ 0 & $\rho _i$ & $1 - \rho _i $ \\ \end {tabular} \label {eq:pdv} 
(8)
where ρi = (1 −β) exp(−σ0si) + β exp(−σisi), and the
hyperparameter \beta represents the accuracy of occlusion pre-
diction, specifically indicating the likelihood that a predic-
tion about occlusion is correct for points that are invisible.
In situations where the occlusion prediction is incorrect, we
resort to using a constant prior density \sigma _0 to estimate the
occlusion probability. This approach helps in adjusting our
model’s predictions on density, particularly for points not
visible to any camera in the training set.
By combining Eqs. (2), (7), (8), the marginal probabil-
ity of  \bm {z}_i satisfies the recursive formula similar to Eq. (5):
p(zi) = α∗
i N(µci, Qci) + (1 −α∗
i )N(µ0, Q0), where
α∗
i =
 vi + (1 −vi)β
 1 −exp(−σisi)

+ (1 −β)(1 −
vi)(1−exp(−σ0si)), and vi = P(Vi = 1) is the probability
of point i being visible to at least one camera in the train-
ing set. The marginal probability of p(z0) can be computed
similarly as follows
  p(\ b
m
 
{z
} _0) = \s um _i w_i^ *v_
i
 
\m
a thcal {N}(\bm {\mu }_{\bm {c}_i}, \bm {Q}_{\bm {c}_i}) + \mathcal {N}(\bm {\mu }_{0}, \bm {Q}_{0}) \sum _i w_i^*(1-v_i), \label {eq:gmm} 
(9)
resulting in a GMM as well, where w∗
i = α∗
i
Qi−1
j=1(1 −α∗
j).
3.4. Neural Visibility Field
So far, we have established a framework that bridges
position-based uncertainty with ray-based observation un-
certainty, while also incorporating visibility factors. Next,
we discuss a method to determine visibility v_i, which is the
probability that a point \protect \bm  {x}_i is visible to at least one camera in
the training set. Let \ p rote ct \ m athcal  {P} = \{\bm {p}_1, \bm {p}_2, \ldots \} be the set of camera
poses in the training set. If point \protect \bm  {x}_i is within the field of
view of a camera \protect \bm  {p} in \protect \mathcal  {P}, the visibility of \protect \bm  {x}_i to camera \protect \bm  {p} can
be expressed as v_{\bm  { p}}(
\ bm {x}_i) = T^p(t_i^p), where \p r ot e ct
 \bm  {x}_i = \bm {o_p} + t_i^p\bm {d_p} is
on a ray from camera \protect \bm  {p}, and T_p(t
_ i^p) denotes the probability
of the ray being transmitted from \protect \bm  {o_p} to t_
i^p without occlusion,
as defined in Eq. (2). Therefore, the probability that point \protect \bm  {x}_i
is visible to at least one camera in the set \protect \mathcal  {P} is given by:
  \la b e l
 
{eq
:v i s_gt} v_\mathcal {P} (\bm {x}) = 1 - \prod _{\bm {p} \in \mathcal {P}} (1 - v_p(\bm {x}_i)). 
(10)
However, directly computing Eq. (10) during volume ren-
dering is impractical. For each point along a ray \protect \bm  {r}, it would
require generating an additional ray r_p from camera \protect \bm  {p} and
sampling points along this ray to determine the point’s visi-
bility to camera \protect \bm  {p}. Doing this for all existing views is compu-
tationally expensive. To address this, we propose to amortize
the cost by training an implicit model to predict the visibility.
4

<!-- page 5 -->
We introduce Neural Visibility Field (NVF), an aug-
mented NeRF that outputs both color uncertainty and vis-
ibility. The enhanced model is defined as  F _ \Th et a
 : (\b m { x}, \bm {d}) \rightarrow (\sigma , \bm {\mu _c}, \bm {Q_c}, v) , where v represents the visibility with respect
to the training views, and \protect \bm  {\mu _c} and \protect \bm  {Q_c} denote the mean and
covariance of the color vector, respectively. The parameters
µc and σ are trained with Mean Square Error loss as in [30].
To train Qc, we employ the Negative Log-Likelihood Loss
as follows:
  \m a t
h
cal
 {L
} _
{
cov
}
 = - \ sum _{r
 \
in \mathcal {R}} \log \Big (\sum _i w_i \mathcal {N}\big (C_g(\bm {r}); \bm {\mu _{c_i}}, \bm {Q_{{c}_i}}\big )\Big ), 
(11)
where R denotes the set of rays in each batch, and Cg(r)
represents the ground truth color of ray r. For training, we
randomly sample points within the scene. The ground truth
visibility, derived using Eq. (10), is then utilized to train the
visibility head, using cross-entropy loss. Please refer to Supp.
for further details on network architecture and training.
3.5. Active Mapping with NVF
In this section, we apply the PDF of ray color, derived
from Sec. 3.4, for active mapping purposes. Let  Z^
{mn}_{\bm {p}} 
be
the color of the ray corresponding to pixel index mm ,n from
camera pose  \bm {p} . The PDF of  Z^
{mn}_{\bm {p}} 
, denoted as  p(\b
m
 {z}^{mn}_{\bm {p}}) , can
be obtained using the formulation provided in Eq. (9). We de-
fine \protect \bm  {Z_p} as a random variable in \pro tect \mathbb  {R}^{H \times W \times 3}, representing the
collective observation of all pixels in an image with height
H and width W.
The goal of active mapping is to identify a camera pose,
denoted as \protect \bm  {p}^*, that maximizes the entropy of the observation
\protect \bm  {Z} at that pose. This is formally expressed as:
  \ lab el 
{
eq:i_gain} \bm {p}^* = \argmax _{\bm {p}} \mathcal {H} (\bm {Z_p} ). 
(12)
Note that we can deduce Eq. (12) from the information gain
or mutual information \prot ec t  \mat h cal  {I}(\bm {Z_p}; \bm {M}) = \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z_p}) - \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z_p| \bm {M}}),
where \protect \bm  {M} represents the random variable of the entire map.
This assumes that \protect \mathcal  {H}(\bm {Z_p| \bm {M}}) is constant, specifically, that
measurement noise remains constant given a known map.
To compute \protect \mathcal  {H}(\bm {Z_p}), we initially assume that the color
of each pixel is independent of the others. Under this as-
sumption, the entropy of \protect \bm  {Z_p} can be calculated as \prot e
c
t \ mathc
a
l  {H}(\bm {Z_p}) = \sum _{m,n} \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z_p}^{mn}). However, this assumption of independence
may not always hold true. For instance, when the camera is
in close proximity to an object, the pixels in the image are
often strongly correlated, particularly since they are measur-
ing points that are spatially close. To account for this spatial
correlation, we introduce a correction term:
  \ma t
h
cal
 
{H}(\
b
m  {Z_p}) = \s
u
m _{m
, n
} \Big ( \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z_p}^{mn}) - f_{\rm corr}(\mathcal {H}(\bm {Z_p}^{mn}); d_{\bm {p}}^{mn}) \Big )\label {eq:id} 
(13)
Here, f_{\rm corr
}
(\ mat
h cal {H}(\bm {Z_p}^{mn}); d_{\bm {p}}^{mn}) incorporates spatial correlation
based on the expected depth d_{
\bm {p}}^{mn} . Furthermore, we use the
upper bound as proposed in [15] to closely approximate the
entropy of the GMM H(Zmn
p
), as it is known that there is
no analytical solution for the entropy of GMM [15]. Further
details on f_{\rm corr
}
(\ mat
h cal {H}(\bm {Z_p}^{mn}); d_{\bm {p}}^{mn}) and entropy computation
are included in supp material.
Within our theoretical framework for estimating uncer-
tainty in NeRF and active mapping, all prior works, to our
best knowledge, can be viewed as special cases. Specifi-
cally, if we drop the visibility factor, each prior work can
be viewed as a specific approximation of our method. For
instance, Lee et al [22] focuses only on the discrete random
variable, computing the Shannon entropy with  -w _i \log w_i ,
which can be regarded as a simplified version of ours, albeit
excluding the differential entropy term Similarly, [34, 40]
uses the weighted average of position-based color variance
to approximate the rays-based observation variance, which
lacks theoretical grounding and ignores the visibility fac-
tor in weight computation. In addition, Zhan et al [57] ap-
proximate the entropy of ray-based observation by directly
summing the position-based entropy of occlusion, whereas,
similarly, Yan et al [54] use the weighted average of position-
based entropy of occlusion to approximate the ray-based
observation entropy.
3.6. Active Mapping Pipeline
Here we briefly describe the active mapping pipeline using
NVF (illustrated in Fig. 2). Please refer to Supp. material
for more details. The process starts with training the NVF
on a small batch of initial views. We employ two strategies
for next view selection. In the sampling-based strategy, we
sample N views from a prior distribution, estimate their un-
certainty using Eq. (12), and select the view with maximum
uncertainty. The gradient-based strategy is implemented by
adjusting the selected pose through gradient-based optimiza-
tion, aimed at maximizing entropy, leveraging the inherent
differentiability of our uncertainty estimation method. Lastly,
the agent proceeds to collect and integrate the new observa-
tions into the training views to re-train the NVF model and
plan the next view.
4. Experiments
In this section, we seek to verify our hypothesis that (a) NVF
outperforms existing methods in both uncertainty quantifica-
tion and active mapping both quantitatively and qualitatively;
and (b) the visibility term plays a vital role in this result.
Simulation Environments and Learning Setup. We con-
duct experiments on three datasets of varying difficulty lev-
els for active mapping: all assets from the original NeRF
dataset [31], the Hubble Space Telescope, and a custom syn-
thetic indoor Room scene. In particular, the Room scene
consists of two spaces divided by a wall. Successfully map-
ping the scene requires traversing both spaces. We assume
access to a coarse bounding box that contains the region of
5

<!-- page 6 -->
Figure 3. Qualitative results of entropy estimation: NVF assigns a higher entropy to previously unobserved regions while the baselines do
not distinguish between the observed (View 1) and unobserved regions (View 2/3). Schematic illustrations of the poses of View 1, 2, and 3
can be found in supp. material. Note that within each method and scene, all rendered views share the same color bar.
interest. All ground truth images used for training NeRF and
assessing reconstruction quality were rendered using Blender
at a resolution of 512 \times 512. We utilized Instant-NGP [32] as
an efficient backbone for all uncertainty estimation methods.
All NeRF models were trained for 5,000 iterations. For NVF,
it first trains the Instant-NGP backbone, freezes its weights,
and then trains variance and visibility heads, to ensure the
performance improvements are attributed to better entropy
estimation instead of a change in the loss function.
Baselines. We compared our method with state-of-the-art
NeRF uncertainty quantification and active mapping meth-
ods. This includes the weight distribution-based entropy
approximation (WD) [22]; occlusion-based entropy approxi-
mation (ActiveRMAP) [57]; weighted occlusion-based en-
tropy approximation - ActiveImplicitRecon (AIR) [54], and
spatial RGB variance-based uncertainty estimation ActiveN-
eRF [34] and NeurAR [40]. As discussed earlier, all of these
works can be viewed as a special case of our method, while
missing key aspects that NVF introduces. In addition, we
include an agent that randomly selects views from the candi-
date poses (Random).
4.1. Uncertainty Estimation
Setup. We qualitatively compare the uncertainty (entropy)
maps produced by our method and the baselines given a set
of training views. For each scene, we design scenarios where
only certain regions are visible in the training views. We then
train all methods on the same training views and query for
uncertainty estimation at an unseen test view. An effective
uncertainty estimation method should be able to differentiate
regions unobserved in the training set, as reconstruction in
these areas is noisy and inaccurate. For the ”Hotdog” scene
from the original NeRF dataset, we randomly sample 20
training views from a 90-degree sector above the plate. In
the Hubble scene, we sample 20 training views from a 90-
degree sector on one side, keeping the opposite side of the
6

<!-- page 7 -->
Figure 4. Reconstruction results and camera view distribution: NVF demonstrates superior reconstruction and scene coverage across all
datasets in comparison to baselines. For room scene, only comparable baselines are presented, full results are provided in supp. material.
Hubble out of view. For the Room scene, we sample 30
training views oriented toward the back wall, the common
wall, and the floor of one of the rooms, ensuring that the
other room is unobserved.
Results. In the Hubble and Hotdog scenes, as illustrated
in Fig. 3, all baseline methods fail to accurately capture
the uncertainty in the unobserved areas of the scenes. Sev-
eral baselines assign greater or similar uncertainty to the
observed views as compared to the unobserved ones. A no-
table example is the Room scene. The first view focuses on
the room observed in the training view, while the second
view targets the common wall between the two rooms. The
result indicates that our method differentiates between the
uncertainties in regions seen in training views and unseen
regions by modeling their visibilities. In Hubble and Hotdog,
ActiveNeRF and NeurAR estimate a similar level of uncer-
tainty for both unobserved and observed regions. However,
in the Room scene, the uncertainty in the unobserved region
is estimated to be lower than the observed. This shows that in
complex scenarios, the uncertainty formulations of ActiveN-
eRF and NeurAR are ineffective, and such formulation alone
is insufficient as guidance to explore unobserved regions.
4.2. Active Mapping
Setup. We deploy active mapping agents with the pipeline
described in Sec. 3.6 with different uncertainty estimation
methods. To ensure a fair comparison, all methods are eval-
uated under the same conditions during the comparison, to
ensure that the planning is driven solely by the uncertainty
estimation. Specifically, all candidate views are uniformly
sampled within the space, without any prior constraints (such
as the hemisphere constraint employed in ActiveNeRF). This
approach ensures that a more accurate uncertainty estimation
method will enable the robot to achieve more precise map-
ping results. For all original NeRF assets and Hubble scenes,
we utilize 3-5 initial views covering only a portion of the
scene, to realistically simulate active mapping scenarios. The
Room scene presents the greatest challenge, with nine ini-
tial views sampled from one room, leaving the second room
entirely unexplored. All agents start without knowledge of
the second room’s existence and are expected to discover it
through uncertainty estimation and reconstruct the scene in
20 steps. Please refer to Supp. material for more details.
Evaluation metric. Our evaluation employs three types of
metrics. For novel view synthesis quality, evaluations are
performed at fixed testing viewpoints. We compare views
synthesized by NeRF with ground truth renderings. The er-
rors are quantified using Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR),
Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (PIPS), Learned Percep-
tual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) [58], and RGB loss. For
reconstructed mesh quality, we quantitatively evaluate the
geometric accuracy of the scene reconstructions. We employ
the metrics, Accuracy (Acc), Completion (Comp), and Com-
pletion Ratio (CR) as proposed in [46]. For visual coverage
(Vis), we assess the proportion of faces in the ground truth
mesh observed without occlusion during the experiments
over all faces. The visibility of each face in the mesh is
tracked using the ground truth mesh and a rasterizer.
Results. In Tab. 1, we show the quantitative results of our
approach in comparison to other baselines. For the original
NeRF Assets, we only include the average of the results
across all scenes due to space limitation, detailed results
are provided in supp. material. Our method significantly
outperforms baseline methods achieving higher-quality re-
7

<!-- page 8 -->
Table 1. Evaluation of Reconstructed Models Using Different Methods for Active Mapping
Scene
Method
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
RGB↓
Acc.↓
Comp↓
CR↑
Vis↑
NeRF
Assets
(Avg.)
Random
17.63
0.766
0.264
0.0193
0.0426
0.0401
0.348
0.225
WD
19.91
0.807
0.227
0.0121
0.0311
0.0204
0.479
0.466
ActiveRMAP
20.03
0.807
0.219
0.0118
0.0292
0.0184
0.510
0.471
AIR
19.86
0.807
0.230
0.0118
0.0290
0.0195
0.494
0.453
ActiveNeRF
18.78
0.771
0.281
0.0157
0.0301
0.0238
0.433
0.415
NeurAR
19.58
0.755
0.286
0.0134
0.0347
0.0251
0.452
0.424
NVF (Ours)
23.90
0.890
0.106
0.0045
0.0193
0.0111
0.685
0.532
Hubble
Random
21.76
0.778
0.265
0.0113
0.0734
0.0262
0.329
0.291
WD
24.15
0.855
0.184
0.0039
0.0297
0.0184
0.471
0.571
ActiveRMAP
23.34
0.835
0.205
0.0048
0.0282
0.0162
0.465
0.570
AIR
24.63
0.862
0.182
0.0035
0.0249
0.0140
0.525
0.586
ActiveNeRF
23.33
0.824
0.250
0.0047
0.0355
0.0201
0.442
0.552
NeurAR
25.19
0.772
0.265
0.0030
0.0480
0.0170
0.416
0.537
NVF (Ours)
27.99
0.919
0.100
0.0016
0.0225
0.0110
0.651
0.681
Room
Random
12.95
0.800
0.378
0.0563
0.1837
0.5468
0.338
0.397
WD
13.42
0.792
0.387
0.0533
0.2893
0.5415
0.317
0.428
ActiveRMAP
13.91
0.786
0.412
0.0411
0.2233
0.4646
0.317
0.450
AIR
15.19
0.829
0.386
0.0307
0.2710
0.3153
0.343
0.498
ActiveNeRF
10.69
0.733
0.434
0.0853
0.1847
0.8181
0.292
0.338
NeurAR
12.23
0.584
0.508
0.0599
0.3948
1.2647
0.178
0.375
NVF (Ours)
22.83
0.943
0.156
0.0053
0.1132
0.1997
0.464
0.586
Table 2. Ablation Studies for Active Mapping with NVF
Ablations
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Vis↑
w/o Vis.
21.11
0.844
0.187
0.382
w/o Var.
23.77
0.897
0.113
0.551
Ind. Rays
20.32
0.822
0.236
0.482
Loose
22.54
0.881
0.137
0.504
NVF (Ours)
24.42
0.902
0.108
0.546
construction and improved visual coverage. This is espe-
cially evident in challenging scenarios such as the Hubble
and Room scenes, where our method successfully explores
the entire scene and excels across all metrics. In contrast,
baseline methods failed to fully explore these scenes, of-
ten revisiting previously explored areas (see Fig. 4) due to
inadequate uncertainty estimation that overlooks visibility.
4.3. Ablation studies
We ablate key components in NVF to examine their role.
First, we negate the visibility factor by presuming all sam-
pled points as visible to the camera, setting the visibility
head output to 1 for any input. Second, we disregard the
spatial color variance estimation from NeRF, assuming a
constant small uncertainty for all sampled points. Third, we
omit the correlation correction factor, treating all rays as
independent. Lastly, for entropy computation, we substitute
the upper bound proposed by [15] with a looser bound, treat-
ing multiple Gaussians as a single Gaussian following [13].
The average results across all scenes are shown in Tab. 2,
highlighting the crucial role in the visibility factor, remov-
ing it significantly drops the performance. We also observe
that the correction of independence in Eq. (13) (”Ind. Rays.”
in Tab. 2), and a tighter upper bound (”Loose”) positively
impact performance. However, the position-based color un-
certainty directly predicted by NeRF (”w/o Var.”) plays a less
important role, underscoring visibility as the most critical
factor in uncertainty estimation for active mapping.
5. Conclusion
In this work, we present Neural Visibility Field, a principled
approach that accounts for visibility in uncertainty quan-
tification and provide a unifying view of prior research in
this direction. We empirically demonstrated that NVF sig-
nificantly outperforms baselines in reconstruction quality
and visual coverage across three scenes with varying levels
of complexity. A limitation of our current active mapping
pipeline is that it does not account for the constraints im-
posed on the planned trajectory of an agent. A possible future
direction is to integrate NVF with cost-aware path planning.
Acknowledgments
This work is supported by NSF grant 2101250. We thank
Mehregan Dor for the feedback on the preliminary version,
and the anonymous reviewers for their comments and feed-
back on our manuscript.
8

<!-- page 9 -->
References
[1] Dejan Azinovi´c, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Dan B Goldman,
Matthias Nießner, and Justus Thies. Neural rgb-d surface
reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6290–
6301, 2022. 2
[2] Shengyong Chen, Youfu Li, and Ngai Ming Kwok. Active
vision in robotic systems: A survey of recent developments.
The International Journal of Robotics Research, 30(11):1343–
1377, 2011. 2
[3] Julian Chibane, Aayush Bansal, Verica Lazova, and Gerard
Pons-Moll. Stereo radiance fields (srf): Learning view syn-
thesis for sparse views of novel scenes. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 7911–7920, 2021. 2
[4] Cl Connolly. The determination of next best views. In Pro-
ceedings. 1985 IEEE international conference on robotics
and automation, pages 432–435. IEEE, 1985. 2
[5] Thomas M Cover. Elements of information theory. John
Wiley & Sons, 1999. 12
[6] Anna Dai, Sotiris Papatheodorou, Nils Funk, Dimos
Tzoumanikas, and Stefan Leutenegger. Fast frontier-based
information-driven autonomous exploration with an mav. In
2020 IEEE international conference on robotics and automa-
tion (ICRA), pages 9570–9576. IEEE, 2020. 2
[7] Tung Dang, Christos Papachristos, and Kostas Alexis. Vi-
sual saliency-aware receding horizon autonomous exploration
with application to aerial robotics. In 2018 IEEE interna-
tional conference on robotics and automation (ICRA), pages
2526–2533. IEEE, 2018. 2
[8] Kangle Deng, Andrew Liu, Jun-Yan Zhu, and Deva Ramanan.
Depth-supervised nerf: Fewer views and faster training for
free. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 12882–12891,
2022. 2
[9] Christian Dornhege and Alexander Kleiner. A frontier-void-
based approach for autonomous exploration in 3d. Advanced
Robotics, 27(6):459–468, 2013. 2
[10] Yilun Du, Yinan Zhang, Hong-Xing Yu, Joshua B Tenenbaum,
and Jiajun Wu. Neural radiance flow for 4d view synthesis and
video processing. In 2021 IEEE/CVF International Confer-
ence on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 14304–14314. IEEE
Computer Society, 2021. 2
[11] Francis Engelmann, J¨org St¨uckler, and Bastian Leibe. Joint
object pose estimation and shape reconstruction in urban
street scenes using 3d shape priors.
In Pattern Recogni-
tion: 38th German Conference, GCPR 2016, Hannover, Ger-
many, September 12-15, 2016, Proceedings 38, pages 219–
230. Springer, 2016. 2
[12] Georgios Georgakis, Bernadette Bucher, Anton Arapin,
Karl Schmeckpeper, Nikolai Matni, and Kostas Daniilidis.
Uncertainty-driven planner for exploration and navigation. In
2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pages 11295–11302. IEEE, 2022. 2
[13] John R Hershey and Peder A Olsen. Approximating the
kullback leibler divergence between gaussian mixture mod-
els. In 2007 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
Speech and Signal Processing-ICASSP’07, pages IV–317.
IEEE, 2007. 8, 13
[14] Matthew D Hoffman, Tuan Anh Le, Pavel Sountsov, Christo-
pher Suter, Ben Lee, Vikash K Mansinghka, and Rif A
Saurous. Probnerf: Uncertainty-aware inference of 3d shapes
from 2d images. In International Conference on Artificial
Intelligence and Statistics, pages 10425–10444. PMLR, 2023.
2
[15] Marco F Huber, Tim Bailey, Hugh Durrant-Whyte, and
Uwe D Hanebeck. On entropy approximation for gaussian
mixture random vectors. In 2008 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Multisensor Fusion and Integration for Intelligent
Systems, pages 181–188. IEEE, 2008. 5, 8, 13
[16] Stefan Isler, Reza Sabzevari, Jeffrey Delmerico, and Davide
Scaramuzza. An information gain formulation for active
volumetric 3d reconstruction. In 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 3477–
3484. IEEE, 2016. 2
[17] Ajay Jain, Ben Mildenhall, Jonathan T Barron, Pieter Abbeel,
and Ben Poole. Zero-shot text-guided object generation with
dream fields. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages 867–876,
2022. 2
[18] Liren Jin, Xieyuanli Chen, Julius R¨uckin, and Marija Popovi´c.
Neu-nbv: Next best view planning using uncertainty estima-
tion in image-based neural rendering. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pages 11305–11312. IEEE, 2023. 2
[19] Diederik P Kingma and Jimmy Ba. Adam: A method for
stochastic optimization.
arXiv preprint arXiv:1412.6980,
2014. 12
[20] Georgios Kopanas and George Drettakis. Improving nerf
quality by progressive camera placement for free-viewpoint
navigation. 2023. 2
[21] Simon Kriegel, Christian Rink, Tim Bodenm¨uller, and
Michael Suppa. Efficient next-best-scan planning for au-
tonomous 3d surface reconstruction of unknown objects. Jour-
nal of Real-Time Image Processing, 10:611–631, 2015. 2
[22] Soomin Lee, Le Chen, Jiahao Wang, Alexander Liniger,
Suryansh Kumar, and Fisher Yu. Uncertainty guided pol-
icy for active robotic 3d reconstruction using neural radiance
fields. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(4):12070–
12077, 2022. 2, 5, 6
[23] Kejie Li, Yansong Tang, Victor Adrian Prisacariu, and
Philip HS Torr. Bnv-fusion: Dense 3d reconstruction using bi-
level neural volume fusion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 6166–6175, 2022. 2
[24] Tianye Li, Mira Slavcheva, Michael Zollhoefer, Simon Green,
Christoph Lassner, Changil Kim, Tanner Schmidt, Steven
Lovegrove, Michael Goesele, Richard Newcombe, et al. Neu-
ral 3d video synthesis from multi-view video. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5521–5531, 2022. 2
[25] Zhengqi Li, Simon Niklaus, Noah Snavely, and Oliver Wang.
Neural scene flow fields for space-time view synthesis of
dynamic scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
9

<!-- page 10 -->
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6498–
6508, 2021. 2
[26] Chen-Hsuan Lin, Wei-Chiu Ma, Antonio Torralba, and Simon
Lucey. Barf: Bundle-adjusting neural radiance fields. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 5741–5751, 2021. 2
[27] Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi SM Sajjadi,
Jonathan T Barron, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Daniel Duck-
worth. Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields for uncon-
strained photo collections. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 7210–7219, 2021. 2
[28] Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Noha Radwan, Mehdi SM Sajjadi,
Jonathan T Barron, Alexey Dosovitskiy, and Daniel Duck-
worth. Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields for uncon-
strained photo collections. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 7210–7219, 2021. 2
[29] Lars Mescheder, Michael Oechsle, Michael Niemeyer, Se-
bastian Nowozin, and Andreas Geiger. Occupancy networks:
Learning 3d reconstruction in function space. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 4460–4470, 2019. 2
[30] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021. 2,
5
[31] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthe-
sis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021. 1, 3,
5
[32] Thomas M¨uller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexander
Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a multiresolu-
tion hash encoding. ACM transactions on graphics (TOG),
41(4):1–15, 2022. 6, 12
[33] Michael Niemeyer, Jonathan T Barron, Ben Mildenhall,
Mehdi SM Sajjadi, Andreas Geiger, and Noha Radwan. Reg-
nerf: Regularizing neural radiance fields for view synthesis
from sparse inputs. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
5480–5490, 2022. 2
[34] Xuran Pan, Zihang Lai, Shiji Song, and Gao Huang. Activen-
erf: Learning where to see with uncertainty estimation. In
European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 230–246.
Springer, 2022. 1, 2, 5, 6, 13
[35] Jeong Joon Park, Peter Florence, Julian Straub, Richard New-
combe, and Steven Lovegrove. Deepsdf: Learning continuous
signed distance functions for shape representation. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 165–174, 2019. 2
[36] Sida Peng, Chen Geng, Yuanqing Zhang, Yinghao Xu, Qian-
qian Wang, Qing Shuai, Xiaowei Zhou, and Hujun Bao. Im-
plicit neural representations with structured latent codes for
human body modeling. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analy-
sis and Machine Intelligence, 2023. 2
[37] Richard Pito. A solution to the next best view problem for
automated surface acquisition. IEEE Transactions on pattern
analysis and machine intelligence, 21(10):1016–1030, 1999.
2
[38] Ben Poole, Ajay Jain, Jonathan T Barron, and Ben Mildenhall.
Dreamfusion: Text-to-3d using 2d diffusion. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2209.14988, 2022. 2
[39] Santhosh K Ramakrishnan, Ziad Al-Halah, and Kristen Grau-
man. Occupancy anticipation for efficient exploration and
navigation. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
Part V 16, pages 400–418. Springer, 2020. 2
[40] Yunlong Ran, Jing Zeng, Shibo He, Jiming Chen, Lincheng
Li, Yingfeng Chen, Gimhee Lee, and Qi Ye. Neurar: Neural
uncertainty for autonomous 3d reconstruction with implicit
neural representations. IEEE Robotics and Automation Let-
ters, 8(2):1125–1132, 2023. 2, 5, 6, 13, 18
[41] Korbinian Schmid, Heiko Hirschm¨uller, Andreas D¨omel, Iris
Grixa, Michael Suppa, and Gerd Hirzinger. View planning
for multi-view stereo 3d reconstruction using an autonomous
multicopter. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems, 65:
309–323, 2012. 2
[42] William R Scott, Gerhard Roth, and Jean-Franc¸ois Rivest.
View planning for automated three-dimensional object recon-
struction and inspection. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR),
35(1):64–96, 2003. 2
[43] James P Sethna. Statistical mechanics: entropy, order param-
eters, and complexity. Oxford University Press, USA, 2021.
13
[44] Jianxiong Shen, Adria Ruiz, Antonio Agudo, and Francesc
Moreno-Noguer. Stochastic neural radiance fields: Quanti-
fying uncertainty in implicit 3d representations. In 2021 In-
ternational Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 972–981.
IEEE, 2021. 2
[45] Edward J Smith, Michal Drozdzal, Derek Nowrouzezahrai,
David Meger, and Adriana Romero-Soriano. Uncertainty-
driven active vision for implicit scene reconstruction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2210.00978, 2022. 2
[46] Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J Davi-
son. imap: Implicit mapping and positioning in real-time. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 6229–6238, 2021. 7
[47] Niko S¨underhauf, Jad Abou-Chakra, and Dimity Miller.
Density-aware nerf ensembles: Quantifying predictive uncer-
tainty in neural radiance fields. In 2023 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 9370–
9376. IEEE, 2023. 2
[48] Matthew Tancik, Ethan Weber, Evonne Ng, Ruilong Li, Brent
Yi, Terrance Wang, Alexander Kristoffersen, Jake Austin,
Kamyar Salahi, Abhik Ahuja, et al. Nerfstudio: A modular
framework for neural radiance field development. In ACM
SIGGRAPH 2023 Conference Proceedings, pages 1–12, 2023.
12, 13
[49] Mikaela Angelina Uy, Kiyohiro Nakayama, Guandao Yang,
Rahul Krishna Thomas, Leonidas Guibas, and Ke Li. Nerf
revisited: Fixing quadrature instability in volume rendering.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.20685, 2023. 2
10

<!-- page 11 -->
[50] Vlatko Vedral. The role of relative entropy in quantum infor-
mation theory. Reviews of Modern Physics, 74(1):197, 2002.
13
[51] Zirui Wang, Shangzhe Wu, Weidi Xie, Min Chen, and Vic-
tor Adrian Prisacariu. Nerf–: Neural radiance fields without
known camera parameters. arXiv preprint arXiv:2102.07064,
2021. 2
[52] Wenqi Xian, Jia-Bin Huang, Johannes Kopf, and Changil Kim.
Space-time neural irradiance fields for free-viewpoint video.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 9421–9431, 2021. 2
[53] Yiheng Xie, Towaki Takikawa, Shunsuke Saito, Or Litany,
Shiqin Yan, Numair Khan, Federico Tombari, James Tompkin,
Vincent Sitzmann, and Srinath Sridhar. Neural fields in visual
computing and beyond. In Computer Graphics Forum, pages
641–676. Wiley Online Library, 2022. 2
[54] Dongyu Yan, Jianheng Liu, Fengyu Quan, Haoyao Chen,
and Mengmeng Fu. Active implicit object reconstruction
using uncertainty-guided next-best-view optimization. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, 2023. 1, 2, 5, 6, 18
[55] Jiawei Yang, Marco Pavone, and Yue Wang. Freenerf: Im-
proving few-shot neural rendering with free frequency regu-
larization. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8254–8263,
2023. 2
[56] Javier Yu, Jun En Low, Keiko Nagami, and Mac Schwager.
Nerfbridge: Bringing real-time, online neural radiance field
training to robotics. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.09761, 2023.
13
[57] Huangying Zhan, Jiyang Zheng, Yi Xu, Ian Reid, and Hamid
Rezatofighi. Activermap: Radiance field for active mapping
and planning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.12656, 2022. 1, 2,
5, 6
[58] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman,
and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep
features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
586–595, 2018. 7
11

<!-- page 12 -->
μc
σ
d
Qc
v
position
encoding
x
NeRF
direction
encoding
MLP
64
64
64
MLP
64
64
64
MLP
128
128
128
Density
Embedding
Figure 5. NVF Architecture: The MLP block consists of fully connected layers that use the ReLU activation function. The numbers inside
the block denote the size of the layer. The final output from the visibility (v) MLP and RGB (µc) MLP are passed through the sigmoid
activation function while the RGB Variance (Qc) MLP uses softplus activation
A. Method Details
A.1. NVF architecture and training details
NVF is an augmentation of a NeRF consisting of two addi-
tional MLP heads for predicting RGB variance and visibility.
Specifically, we implement NVF on top of a nerfstudio [48]
implementation of Instant-NGP [32], where the color MLP
head represents µc. Alongside the color head is a MLP head
for RGB variance, outputting a 3x1 vector Qc. Similarly, the
visibility MLP head is attached alongside the density head.
For a visualization of the architecture, see Appendix Fig. 5.
In practice, we train Instant-NGP, variance, and visibility
separately and in sequence. First, we train the NeRF back-
bone for 5000 iterations using a learning rate of 0.01 and
4096 rays per batch. Next, the variance head is trained for
500 iterations using a learning rate of 0.001 and 4096 rays
per batch. Finally, the visibility head is trained for 500 itera-
tions using a learning rate of 0.001 and 65536 samples per
batch. We train all modules using the Adam optimizer [19].
A.2. Entropy computation details
Joint Entropy of the Camera Observation. We discuss the
details on the computation of the joint entropy H(Zp) as
formulated in Eq. (13). For simplicity in this discussion, we
denote the joint entropy as H(Z) in this section. We model
the joint observation of all rays as a Bayesian network, where
the observation of each pixel only depends on its adjacent
neighboring pixel. Consequently, the joint probability can be
factorized as p(z) = Q
mn p(zmn|zm+1,n, zm,n+1). Note
that for the sake of brevity, boundary terms where a pixel
lies at the image edge are omitted here. Then, by applying
the chain rule of entropy[5], we obtain:
  \m a
t
hca
l {H}(\bm {Z} ) = \sum _{m,n} \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z}_{mn} | \bm {Z}_{m+1,n}, \bm {Z}_{m,n+1}) 
(14)
We then apply the inequality H(Zmn|Zm+1,n, Zm,n+1) ≤
H(Zmn|Zm+1,n)
and
H(Zmn|Zm+1,n, Zm,n+1)
≤
H(Zmn|Zm,n+1). These allow us to derive an upper bound
for H(Z):
  \m a
t
hca
l
 
{
H}(\bm {Z}) \l e q \sum _{m,n} 
\frac {1}{2} \big (\mathcal {H}(\bm {Z}_{m,n} | \bm {Z}_{m+1,n}) + \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z}_{m,n} | \bm {Z}_{m,n+1} ) \big ) 
(15)
Then we connect the conditional entropy with the corre-
lation between the two adjacent rays. We let
  \rho  _ { m+1,n} = 1 - \
frac {\mathcal {H}(\bm {Z}_{m,n} | \bm {Z}_{m+1,n})}{\mathcal {H}(\bm {Z}_{m+1,n})} 
(16)
where ρ is as a measure of correlation. Specifically, a ρ
value closer to 1 indicates Zm,n and Zm+1,n are strongly
correlated, whereas a ρ tends to 0 suggests they are not
correlated. It is important to note that this definition of corre-
lation, based on entropy, differs from the widely recognized
12

<!-- page 13 -->
Pearson correlation coefficient, and is commonly used in
quantum information[50]. Consequently, we can obtain the
upper bound:
  \m a
t
hca
l { H}(\bm {Z}) \leq \sum _{m,n} (1-\rho _{mn}) \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z}_{mn}) 
(17)
We assume that the correlation between two points in the
scene can be modeled as a function of their spatial distance,
a concept commonly referred to as the correlation function
in statistical physics [43]. We adopt a truncated least-square
form for this correlation function.
  \r h
o
 ( x )
 = \ be g i n 
{ c ases} 1 - (\frac {x}{\xi })^2~\text {, if}~x<\xi ,\\ 0~\text {, otherwise} \end {cases} \label {eq:rho} 
(18)
This formula indicates that two points located within a
distance threshold \xi of each other are strongly correlated,
whereas those beyond this threshold are considered indepen-
dent. It is noteworthy that this term bears resemblance to
the correlation function \rho  (x) =  
\ exp (-\frac {x}{\xi }), which is com-
monly applied in statistical physics [43], and ξ represents
the correlation length. Empirical evaluations indicate that
the use of either correlation function expression significantly
outperforms the scenario where all rays are assumed to be
independent (ρ = 0). Notably, a marginal improvement was
observed when utilizing Eq. (18).
Therefore, we can approximate the correlation between
two adjacent rays based on their expected depth, expressed
as ρmn = ρ(dmn∆ϕ), where ∆ϕ is the angular resolution of
each pixel, dmn is the expected depth of ray at pixel (m, n).
This implies that when the camera is closer to an object,
the observations in adjacent pixels of the camera exhibit
stronger correlation. Hence the actual total information gain
is smaller than the sum of the information gain of each pixel.
Accordingly, the correction function fcorr in Eq. (13) can be
defined as:
  f_{corr}(\m athc a l {H}(\bm {Z}_{mn}); d_{mn}) = \rho (d_{mn} \Delta \phi ) \mathcal {H}(\bm {Z}_{mn}) 
(19)
In our experiments, we let the correlation length ξ = kD∆ϕ,
where D represents the diameter of the coarse bounding box
enclosing the object, and k is a hyperparameter, and we let
k = 0.25.
Entropy of GMM. We then introduce the details to
compute the entropy for each ray, which is modeled as
a Gaussian Mixture Model (GMM). For the sake of sim-
plicity, we denote the GMM’s distribution as p(\b m
 
{ x}) = \su m _i w_i \mathcal {N}(\bm {x};\bm {\mu }_i, \bm {Q}_i). We use the upper bound proposed
in [15] to closely approximate the entropy of the GMM
H(X):
  \m a
t
h
ca
l
 {H} (\ b m
 {X}
)
 \leq \sum
 _i w_i \left (- \log w_i + \frac {1}{2} \log \left ( (2 \pi e)^N |\bm {Q}_i|\right ) \right )~\label {eq:huber} 
(20)
This upper bound is expected to provide a more accurate
approximation of the true entropy of the GMM compared
to the conventional method which approximates the entropy
using a single Gaussian that matches the first two moments
of the GMM[13], given by H(X) ≤
1
2 log
 (2πe)N|Σ|

where \protect \bm  {\Sigma } is calculated as:
  
\
b
m 
{
\S i gma  } = \s u m _i  w_i \left (\bm {Q}_i + (\bm {\mu _i}-\bm {\bar {\mu }})(\bm {\mu _i} - \bm {\bar {\mu }})^T \right )~\label {eq:single} 
(21)
and \protect \bm  {\bar {\mu }} is the weighted mean of the Gaussian components,
defined as \p r o
t ect \bm  {\bar {\mu }} = \sum _i w_i \bm {\mu _i} . It is worth mentioning that
the baseline method [34, 40] use the weighted average of
position-based color variance to approximate the rays-based
observation variance by employing a single Gaussian whose
mean and variance are the weighted averages of the means
and variances of all samples along the rays, respectively ;
in other words, Σ = P
i wiQi. This approach resembles
the first term in Eq. (21) but misses the covariance term
 (\ b m {\mu  _i}-\bm {\bar {\mu }})(\bm {\mu _i} - \bm {\bar {\mu }})^T . Additionally, it does not take into ac-
count the visibility to the training views.
In summary, we derive an upper bound for the pixel-
wise entropy, and consequently, for the joint entropy of each
view, this upper bound is utilized to closely approximate
the information gain at a given pose. In the planning phase,
given a candidate pose, we first apply Appendix Eq. (20) to
compute the entropy for each ray, subsequently, we compute
the joint entropy of the image observation as per Eq. (13)
at that pose, which then serves as a reward function in the
planning process.
A.3. Active mapping implementation details
Active Mapping Pipeline. To train NVF within an active
mapping framework, we build our pipeline on top of nerf-
studio [48] and NerfBridge [56]. Every time a new view
is added to NVF, the model is trained from scratch on the
collection of its observed views.
After training, we sample candidate poses in the scene,
without collision with the object, by filtering all poses within
a density threshold. In the Room scene, the sampler addi-
tionally thresholds for collisions between view poses and
the current pose, to make sure the agent could move to the
new pose without collision. After candidate view poses are
generated, NVF computes the entropy of each pose. The
view with the highest entropy is next rendered in the scene
and added to the observations. This procedure repeats until
the horizon step is met, as is shown in Alg. 1. In the exper-
iments, we sample N = 512 candidate views and run the
active mapping for 20 steps; the evaluations are performed
after the last planning step.
Gradient-based Optimization for Planning. In addition
to the method of finding the best view among a randomly
sampled candidate poses set, we also performed experiments
on 6 DoF pose-refinement on the camera poses, p ∈SE(3),
13

<!-- page 14 -->
Figure 6. Schematics of the proposed Bayesian Network: Z represents the observed (ray-based) color, C represents the emitted (position-
based) color, D represents if the interval is occluded, V represents the visibility,
.
as the entropy function H is a fully differentiable differen-
tiable function of p. We find the optimal p such that
  \ bm {p}
^* =\ar
gmax _{\bm {p} \in SE(3)} \mathcal {H}(\bm {\bm {Z}_p}) 
(22)
We first find the top k poses with the highest entropy Pk and
perform gradient-based optimization to refine the poses. To
reduce the size of the computation graph and the memory
requirements, a subset of pixels Zi ⊂Zp with an image is
used to estimate the expected entropy, instead of the full im-
age. We perform backpropogation on this estimated entropy
using an Adam optimizer with a learning rate of 1e −4, to
find the optimum pose.
Algorithm 1 Active Mapping with NVF
1: Input:
2:
P ←initial poses
3:
Z ←initial images
4: for i = 1 to nhorizon do
5:
FΘ ←trainNVF(P, Z)
\triangleright train NVF
6:
Pc ←samplePoses(FΘ) \triangleright sample candidate poses
7:
pi ←arg max
p∈Pc
H(Zp|FΘ)
8:
P ←{pi} ∪P
9:
Z ←takeImageAt({pi}) ∪Z \triangleright update training set
10: return FΘ
B. Experiments Details
B.1. Uncertainty Estimation details
As for the entropy comparison experiments shown in Fig. 3
of the main paper, Appendix Fig. 7 provides an illustration
of the pose of the training views and evaluation views.
Algorithm 2 Gradient-Based Optimization for Planning
1: Input:
2:
P ←sampled poses
3: Pk ←getTopKPoses(P, H)
4: for i = 1 to niterations do
5:
for p in Pk do
6:
Zp ←sampleRays(p)
7:
p ←p + η ∂(H(Zp|FΘ))
∂p
8: ˜p = arg max
p∈Pk
H(Zp|FΘ)
9: return ˜p
B.2. Mesh metrics implementation details
For computing Accuracy, Completion, and Completion Ra-
tio metrics, ground truth points are sampled from the ground
truth scene meshes. Points from NVF’s reconstructed mesh
are sampled from the observation view rays. Accuracy mea-
sures the mean distance of sampled points from the recon-
structed mesh to the nearest corresponding points in the
ground truth mesh. Completion instead measures the mean
distance of sampled ground truth points to the nearest re-
constructed mesh points. Completion Ratio calculates the
percentage of completion distances being below a threshold.
For the original NeRF assets and Hubble scene, the threshold
is set to 0.01. For the Room scene, as the scale is larger, the
threshold is set to 0.1.
Visual coverage quantifies the surface area a trajectory
of views covers a scene. We compute this with rasterization.
Given a ground truth mesh of the scene, we project the mesh
onto all of the observation views. In each rendered image,
we record the number of mesh faces visible to the corre-
sponding view. We append all observed faces to a visible set.
14

<!-- page 15 -->
Figure 7. Uncertainty Experiment Scene Setups: Illustration of the training views and evaluation views in Fig. 3. The black frustums
correspond to the training views, the green frustums are the evaluation views. For more video results, please refer to https://sites.
google.com/view/nvf-cvpr24/
.
Computing visual coverage is then the ratio of the length of
the visible set to the total number of faces in the mesh.
C. More Qualitative Results
C.1. Active Mapping
In addition to the results in Tab. 1, more qualitative results
are presented in Appendix Fig. 8. As shown, our method
achieves better novel view synthesis quality compared to
baseline methods.
C.2. Gradient-based Pose-Optimization results
Certain methods compare uncertainty among a finite set
of pre-defined scene-specific view candidates. This limits
their applicability to previously unseen scenes as well as
their ability to reach an optimal solution. Gradient-based
pose estimation aims to find the next-best-view (NBV) on
a continuous manifold which broadens its applicability to
different scenarios and results in optimal view selection.
The results in Tab. 1 highlight our approach’s ability to
select the optimal view from proposed candidates, intention-
ally omitting gradient-based optimization to ensure a fair
comparison. To extend our analysis, we conducted a further
15

<!-- page 16 -->
Figure 8. Qualitative Results: Comparisons on novel view synthesis results. Our method demonstrates superior novel-view synthesis
rendering fine details in comparison to all baselines. For more video results, please refer to https://sites.google.com/view/nvf-
cvpr24/
16

<!-- page 17 -->
Figure 9. Additional reconstruction results and camera view distribution For more video results, please refer to https://sites.
google.com/view/nvf-cvpr24/
.
17

<!-- page 18 -->
Table 3. Performance of gradient-based methods
Method
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
RGB↓
Acc.↓
Comp.↓
C.R.↑
Vis.↑
AIR
24.63
0.862
0.182
0.0035
0.0249
0.0140
0.525
0.586
NeurAR
25.19
0.772
0.265
0.0030
0.0480
0.0170
0.416
0.537
NVF
27.99
0.919
0.100
0.0016
0.0225
0.0110
0.651
0.681
AIR-OPT
24.41
0.858
0.183
0.0037
0.0267
0.0159
0.450
0.548
NeurAR-OPT
25.42
0.794
0.245
0.0029
0.0461
0.0180
0.381
0.563
NVF-OPT
29.33
0.930
0.086
0.0012
0.0196
0.0106
0.666
0.690
Table 4. Ablation Studies
Ablations
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
RGB↓
Acc.↓
Comp.↓
C.R.↑
Vis.↑
w/o Vis.
21.11
0.844
0.187
0.0119
0.0466
0.0765
0.479
0.382
w/o Var.
23.77
0.897
0.113
0.0049
0.0276
0.0305
0.639
0.551
Ind. Rays
20.32
0.822
0.236
0.0125
0.0560
0.0506
0.451
0.482
Loose
22.54
0.881
0.137
0.0100
0.0247
0.0609
0.600
0.504
NVF (Ours)
24.42
0.902
0.108
0.0041
0.0287
0.0324
0.628
0.546
comparison with gradient-based optimization methods for
view selection, detailed in Tab. 3. This comparison, which
includes our method and two others [40, 54], utilizes gradi-
ent descent to refine the selection of views. As demonstrated
in Appendix Tab. 3, the integration of gradient-based opti-
mization considerably improves our method’s performance,
allowing it to surpass competing gradient-based approaches.
This superior performance is attributed to our method’s more
precise estimation of uncertainty.
C.3. Additional Results
We present the complete results of all original NeRF assets in
Appendix Tab. 5 & 6. We also present the complete results of
the ablation study in Appendix Tab. 4. The result is averaged
across all scenes.
18

<!-- page 19 -->
Table 5. Results of original NeRF assets (1)
Scene
Method
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
RGB↓
Acc.↓
Comp.↓
C.R.↑
Vis.↑
Chair
Random
17.17
0.835
0.190
0.0193
0.0470
0.0470
0.250
0.311
WD
18.07
0.853
0.197
0.0163
0.0386
0.0167
0.499
0.582
ActiveRMAP
18.67
0.863
0.183
0.0136
0.0277
0.0144
0.584
0.614
AIR
18.47
0.859
0.176
0.0155
0.0296
0.0135
0.568
0.614
ActiveNeRF
15.90
0.806
0.257
0.0280
0.0295
0.0223
0.407
0.503
NeurAR
19.24
0.817
0.231
0.0127
0.0427
0.0155
0.485
0.596
NVF (Ours)
23.89
0.937
0.057
0.0041
0.0209
0.0089
0.763
0.705
Drums
Random
17.08
0.753
0.286
0.0198
0.0378
0.0162
0.518
0.193
WD
19.07
0.796
0.252
0.0126
0.0288
0.0130
0.575
0.444
ActiveRMAP
18.77
0.784
0.264
0.0134
0.0385
0.0128
0.574
0.443
AIR
19.00
0.789
0.277
0.0126
0.0319
0.0115
0.596
0.464
ActiveNeRF
18.35
0.767
0.305
0.0147
0.0325
0.0160
0.479
0.393
NeurAR
18.22
0.722
0.328
0.0151
0.0434
0.0158
0.453
0.401
NVF (Ours)
21.00
0.866
0.142
0.0079
0.0186
0.0069
0.836
0.541
Ficus
Random
19.86
0.826
0.202
0.0103
0.0254
0.0141
0.671
0.355
WD
17.98
0.777
0.316
0.0163
0.0299
0.0172
0.553
0.601
ActiveRMAP
19.40
0.803
0.263
0.0122
0.0260
0.0122
0.653
0.637
AIR
18.75
0.772
0.325
0.0134
0.0237
0.0145
0.575
0.554
ActiveNeRF
18.75
0.762
0.366
0.0134
0.0210
0.0202
0.560
0.529
NeurAR
20.27
0.755
0.337
0.0094
0.0254
0.0189
0.545
0.513
NVF (Ours)
22.76
0.900
0.089
0.0053
0.0112
0.0062
0.896
0.649
Hotdog
Random
19.87
0.861
0.166
0.0107
0.0379
0.0565
0.239
0.361
WD
21.84
0.892
0.131
0.0066
0.0186
0.0395
0.344
0.455
ActiveRMAP
22.75
0.895
0.130
0.0053
0.0197
0.0415
0.338
0.466
AIR
22.35
0.897
0.124
0.0058
0.0197
0.0381
0.351
0.470
ActiveNeRF
21.57
0.885
0.145
0.0070
0.0234
0.0335
0.324
0.461
NeurAR
22.90
0.866
0.171
0.0051
0.0279
0.0320
0.317
0.450
NVF (Ours)
26.10
0.928
0.084
0.0025
0.0157
0.0356
0.371
0.472
19

<!-- page 20 -->
Table 6. Results of original NeRF assets (2)
Scene
Method
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
RGB↓
Acc.↓
Comp.↓
C.R.↑
Vis.↑
Lego
Random
16.49
0.720
0.265
0.0229
0.0599
0.0504
0.161
0.115
WD
18.54
0.771
0.217
0.0142
0.0305
0.0283
0.257
0.224
ActiveRMAP
17.49
0.752
0.234
0.0180
0.0238
0.0237
0.280
0.227
AIR
19.33
0.797
0.189
0.0118
0.0262
0.0249
0.296
0.230
ActiveNeRF
17.59
0.736
0.263
0.0176
0.0265
0.0317
0.222
0.199
NeurAR
15.12
0.713
0.277
0.0314
0.0246
0.0357
0.319
0.189
NVF (Ours)
23.97
0.896
0.082
0.0040
0.0131
0.0167
0.426
0.270
Materials
Random
15.90
0.802
0.220
0.0266
0.0409
0.0800
0.117
0.089
WD
19.38
0.845
0.174
0.0122
0.0197
0.0275
0.343
0.304
ActiveRMAP
19.68
0.843
0.174
0.0117
0.0213
0.0271
0.345
0.303
AIR
19.45
0.844
0.171
0.0138
0.0238
0.0320
0.318
0.289
ActiveNeRF
18.73
0.833
0.191
0.0135
0.0207
0.0290
0.322
0.287
NeurAR
19.68
0.833
0.182
0.0109
0.0196
0.0339
0.348
0.255
NVF (Ours)
25.36
0.931
0.061
0.0029
0.0107
0.0134
0.564
0.396
Mic
Random
21.18
0.851
0.205
0.0081
0.0294
0.0276
0.468
0.257
WD
26.79
0.942
0.067
0.0022
0.0176
0.0087
0.755
0.564
ActiveRMAP
26.60
0.940
0.069
0.0022
0.0187
0.0095
0.752
0.532
AIR
24.81
0.927
0.107
0.0034
0.0165
0.0091
0.728
0.508
ActiveNeRF
24.96
0.926
0.101
0.0033
0.0198
0.0105
0.709
0.497
NeurAR
25.15
0.889
0.159
0.0031
0.0304
0.0099
0.679
0.528
NVF (Ours)
27.99
0.956
0.053
0.0016
0.0161
0.0070
0.854
0.566
Ship
Random
15.75
0.578
0.483
0.0281
0.0580
0.0456
0.250
0.252
WD
19.54
0.663
0.369
0.0112
0.0525
0.0313
0.374
0.540
ActiveRMAP
19.61
0.665
0.343
0.0112
0.0487
0.0290
0.385
0.543
AIR
19.22
0.658
0.367
0.0121
0.0515
0.0307
0.378
0.513
ActiveNeRF
17.19
0.569
0.485
0.0197
0.0606
0.0370
0.329
0.496
NeurAR
19.38
0.556
0.491
0.0115
0.0569
0.0461
0.331
0.483
NVF (Ours)
22.32
0.742
0.254
0.0059
0.0445
0.0188
0.454
0.596
20
