<!-- page 1 -->
MSP-MVS: Multi-Granularity Segmentation Prior Guided Multi-View Stereo
Zhenlong Yuan1, Cong Liu2, Fei Shen3, Zhaoxin Li4, 5*, Jinguo Luo2, Tianlu Mao1, Zhaoqi Wang1
1Institute of Computing Technology, Chinese Academy of Sciences
2Harbin Institute of Technology, Shenzhen
3Nanjing University of Science and Technology, Nanjing
4Agricultural Information Institute, Chinese Academy of Agricultural Sciences
5Key Laboratory of Agricultural Big Data, Ministry of Agriculture and Rural Affairs
yuanzhenlong21b@ict.ac.cn, liucong@stu.hit.edu.cn, feishen@njust.edu.cn,
cszli@hotmail.com, 23s153135@stu.hit.edu.cn, {ltm, zqwang}@ict.ac.cn
Abstract
Recently, patch deformation-based methods have demon-
strated significant strength in multi-view stereo by adap-
tively expanding the reception field of patches to help re-
construct textureless areas. However, such methods mainly
concentrate on searching for pixels without matching am-
biguity (i.e., reliable pixels) when constructing deformed
patches, while neglecting the deformation instability caused
by unexpected edge-skipping, resulting in potential match-
ing distortions. Addressing this, we propose MSP-MVS, a
method introducing multi-granularity segmentation prior for
edge-confined patch deformation. Specifically, to avoid un-
expected edge-skipping, we first aggregate and further refine
multi-granularity depth edges gained from Semantic-SAM
as prior to guide patch deformation within depth-continuous
(i.e., homogeneous) areas. Moreover, to address attention im-
balance caused by edge-confined patch deformation, we im-
plement adaptive equidistribution and disassemble-clustering
of correlative reliable pixels (i.e., anchors), thereby promot-
ing attention-consistent patch deformation. Finally, to prevent
deformed patches from falling into local-minimum match-
ing costs caused by the fixed sampling pattern, we introduce
disparity-sampling synergistic 3D optimization to help iden-
tify global-minimum matching costs. Evaluations on ETH3D
and Tanks & Temples benchmarks prove our method obtains
state-of-the-art performance with remarkable generalization.
Introduction
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) is a technique that employs im-
ages captured from different viewpoints to reconstruct 3D
scenes or objects. Its diverse application and downstream
task spans across object detection (Lu et al. 2023, 2024), im-
age denoising (Yang et al. 2024c; Li et al. 2022a), video rep-
resentation (Liu et al. 2024b,c), multiview clustering (Guan
et al. 2024b,a), etc. Numerous ideas (Chen et al. 2024a,b;
Kang et al. 2025) and datasets (Yao et al. 2020) have ad-
vanced its progress. However, it still faces the primary chal-
lenge of reconstructing large textureless areas.
The majority of traditional MVS methods are extended
from the PatchMatch (PM) (Barnes et al. 2009) algorithm,
*Corresponding Author.
Copyright © 2025, Association for the Advancement of Artificial
Intelligence (www.aaai.org). All rights reserved.
 
Figure 1: Comparative analysis between APD-MVS and our
method. In (c) and (d), green, blue and red dots respectively
denote the central pixel, conventional PM and deformable
PM. Due to the lack of depth edge guidance in APD-MVS
(c), its deformable PM occurs edge-skipping, thereby cover-
ing areas with depth-discontinuity. Differently, our method
(d) leverages multi-granularity segmentation image (b) as
prior to guide deformable PM within homogeneous areas.
which predicts depth hypothesis by computing the minimum
matching cost between patch pairs and achieves iterative re-
newal through propagation and refinement. However, depth
hypotheses may exhibit ambiguity in textureless areas when
patches lack reliable pixel correspondence. To tackle this,
numerous methods attempt to introduce technologies such
as cascade architecture (Liao et al. 2019), confidence esti-
mators (Li et al. 2020), superpixel planarization (Yuan et al.
2024b) and planar priors (Ren et al. 2023), etc. Yet these
methods either require complex and time-consuming post-
processing or result in excessively smooth surface details.
Differently, learning-based methods employ deep neural
networks to create learnable 3D cost volumes, thereby en-
abling the extraction of high-dimensional features and thus
providing a wider receptive field. Although typical meth-
ods employ deformable convolutions (Ding et al. 2022) or
arXiv:2407.19323v6  [cs.CV]  25 Nov 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
adopt a coarse-to-fine strategy (Su and Tao 2023) to broaden
the receptive field, their unaffordable time and memory con-
sumption make them unsuitable for high-resolution imagery.
Addressing this, others attempt to employ lightweight GRU
(Yan et al. 2020) or leverage vision transformers (Cao, Ren,
and Fu 2024) to compact 3D volumes and enhance predic-
tion quality. However, these networks struggle with general-
ization when faced with scenarios different from their train-
ing datasets, posing challenges for practical applications.
Building on advances in traditional and learning-based
MVS methods, APD-MVS (Wang et al. 2023) offers an in-
novative solution to tackle matching ambiguity. As shown in
Fig. 1 (c), centered on the unreliable green pixel (i.e., pixels
with matching ambiguity), the algorithm first segments its
surrounding area into eight sectors at fixed angles, then se-
lects a reliable red pixel within each sector as anchor pixel
to form the deformable PM, which will substitute the blue
neighbors in conventional PM to help reconstruct textureless
areas. The APD-MVS assumes that all areas in deformable
PM share the same depths and normals as the central pixel,
referred to as homogeneous. Homogeneous areas are no-
tably characterized by depth continuity, which makes them
distinguishable at depth boundaries. Nonetheless, in compli-
cated scenes, shadows and occlusions may cause deformable
PM erroneously crossing depth edges and consequently be-
ing selected into heterogeneous areas (i.e., areas with depth-
discontinuity), leading to potential reconstruction failures.
Therefore, it is crucial to fully exploit depth edges to
aid in patch deformation. However, extracting comprehen-
sive depth edges is challenging. Previous methods (Su and
Tao 2023; Xue et al. 2019; Bao et al. 2014) attempt to ex-
tract RGB edges for reconstruction, while the illumination-
sensitive and shadow-unaware RGB edges are impractical
for complex scenes. Differently, others (Shvets et al. 2024;
Yuan et al. 2024a) leverage semantic information for edge
extraction, yet single semantic information fails to accu-
rately capture comprehensive depth edges in varying scenes.
Consequently, a method that effectively integrates semantic
information from multiple granularities is urgently needed.
Addressing this, we introduce MSP-MVS, which inno-
vately proposes multi-granularity segmentation prior to fa-
cilitate edge-confined patch deformation. Specifically, we
first adopt Semantic-SAM (Li et al. 2023) for panoramic
segmentation to extract semantic information of images
with varying granularities, then we aggregate them to ob-
tain integrated edges that can distinguish different homoge-
neous areas. To better align the integrated edges with ac-
tual depth edges, we further apply edge refinement to gener-
ate fine-grained depth edges, which are then adopted as the
multi-granularity segmentation prior to constrain deformed
patches within homogeneous areas, as shown in Fig. 1 (d).
Although edge-confined patch deformation effectively
removes deformed patches in heterogeneous areas, it in-
evitably causes an imbalanced distribution for the remaining
patches. Addressing this, we introduce an adaptive equidis-
tribution strategy, which adaptively divides the homoge-
neous area of each unreliable pixel into eight sectors based
on the number of surrounding reliable pixels. Moreover, we
further employ a disassemble-clustering strategy to quadru-
ple anchor numbers within each sector and group selected
anchors into eight anchor clusters that serve as new de-
formed patches with attention consistency for matching cost.
While the adaptive equidistribution and disassemble-
clustering strategy achieves attention-consistent patch defor-
mation, the fixed sampling pattern within patches may still
cause the matching cost to fall into a local-minimum. There-
fore, we introduce a disparity-sampling synergistic 3D op-
timization method, which synergistically and iteratively op-
timizes sampling pixels and disparities in 3D space to en-
able deformed patches identify their global minimal match-
ing costs. In summary, our contributions are as follows:
• We develop MSP-MVS, which leverages Semantic-SAM
to aggregate and further refine multi-granularity depth
edges as prior for edge-confined patch deformation.
• We propose adaptive equidistribution for sector division
and disassemble-clustering for anchor clustering to facil-
itate attention-consistent patch deformation.
• We present the disparity-sampling synergistic 3D opti-
mization which optimizes both sampling pixels and dis-
parities to help identify global-minimum matching costs.
Related Work
Traditional Patchmatch-based Methods
The fundamental concept of PatchMatch (Barnes et al. 2009)
employs random initialization, propagation and refinement
to match optimal patch pairs between images. PMS (Bleyer
et al. 2011) pioneers in introducing this in stereo vision, fa-
cilitating the emergence of numerous future works. For ac-
celeration, Gipuma (Galliani, Lasinger, and Schindler 2015)
proposes checkerboard diffusion propagation to achieve al-
gorithm deployment on GPUs. To reconstruct textureless
areas, ACMM (Xu and Tao 2019) presents both multi-
scale architecture and multi-view consistency, improved by
ACMMP (Xu et al. 2022) which introduces triangularization
plane priors for post-processing. Differently, TAPA-MVS
(Romanoni and Matteucci 2019), PCF-MVS (Kuhn, Lin,
and Erdler 2019) and TSAR-MVS (Yuan et al. 2024b) at-
tempt to employ superpixel planarization to reconstruct tex-
tureless areas, while their performance is severely affected
by limited superpixel size. Moreover, HPM-MVS (Ren et al.
2023) introduces non-local extensible sampling patterns to
avoid local optimal solutions, but its performance is limited
by fixed patch receptive fields. Addressing this, SD-MVS
(Yuan et al. 2024a) employs instance segmentation for patch
deformation within instances. However, its results severely
depend on low-precision segmentation results. Moreover,
APD-MVS (Wang et al. 2023) separates patches of unreli-
able pixels into several outward-spreading anchors with high
reliability, while the absence of edge constraint may cause
unexpected edge-skipping and deformation instability.
Learning-based MVS Methods
Recently, the advancement of deep learning has led to the
emergence of numerous large-language models (Luo et al.
2024b,c), gaussian splatting algorithms (Gan et al. 2023a,b),
and self-supervised learning methods (Li and Zhang 2022;

<!-- page 3 -->
Figure 2: Pipeline of MSP-MVS. We first adopt Semantic-SAM to obtain multi-granularity segmentation images. We then
aggregate and further refine these images as multi-granularity segmentation prior to facilitate edge-confined patch deformation.
Subsequently, we propose adaptive equidistribution for sector division and disassemble-clustering strategy for anchor clustering
to promote attention-consistent patch deformation. Additionally, we introduce disparity-sampling synergistic 3D optimization
to help deformed patches identify their global-minimal matching costs. After several iterations we obtain final depth images.
Song et al. 2025c; Chen et al. 2023, 2024c; Cheng and Sun
2024; Sun et al. 2024) and vision-language model (Chen
et al. 2024d; Qian et al. 2024; Chen et al. 2024e). In MVS
field, MVSNet (Yao et al. 2018) is the first to utilize dif-
ferentiable 3D cost volumes to construct deep neural net-
works. To reduce memory, Cas-MVSNet (Yang et al. 2020)
adopts a coarse-to-fine strategy to retain depths across mul-
tiple scales. IterMVS-LS (Wang et al. 2022a) leverages a
lightweight probability estimator to encode depth distri-
bution during regularization. For feature extraction, AAR-
MVSNet (Wei et al. 2021) employed deformable convolu-
tions to achieve adaptive feature aggregation. Differently,
MVSTER (Wang et al. 2022b) leverages the transformer
structure to introduce the multi-head attention mechanism.
Geo-MVSNet (Zhang et al. 2023c) adopts a two-branch
geometry fusion network to enhance geometry perception.
RA-MVSNet (Zhang et al. 2023b) associates hypothesis
planes with surface patches to enhance perception field.
Moreover, Raymvsnet++ (Shi et al. 2023) applies an epipo-
lar transformer to enhance feature aggregation along cam-
era rays. GoMVS (Wu et al. 2024) integrates a geometri-
cally consistent propagation module to refine cost aggrega-
tion. Differently, our method targets on aggregating multi-
granularity depth edges for edge-confined patch deforma-
tion. Despite this, most of them still suffer from either unaf-
fordable memory costs or limited generalization.
Preliminaries
The conventional PM method which utilizes fixed patch for
reconstruction should be detailed at first. Given a series of
input images I = {In | n = 1 · · · N} and corresponding
camera parameters P = {Kn, Rn, Cn | n = 1 · · · N}, each
image is selected from I to be the reference image Ii, with
its depth map sequentially reconstructed through pairwise
matching with the remaining images (I −Ii). Here K, R
and C respectively represent the intrinsic parameters, the ro-
tation matrix and the camera center. Specifically, given refer-
ence image Ii and source image Ij, the homography matrix
Hij for pixel p in Ii is defined as follows:
Hij = Kj

RjR−1
i
+ Rj (Ci −Cj) nT
nT dK−1
i
p

K−1
i
,
(1)
where nT and d respectively denote normal and depth hy-
pothesis. Given the fixed patch which is a square window
W centered on p in Ii, we can leverage Hij to obtain its
corresponding patch W ′ in Ij . Then the matching cost is:
mi,j (p, W) = 1 −
cov (W, W ′)
p
cov (W, W) cov (W ′, W ′)
,
(2)
where cov is weighted covariance (Sch¨onberger et al. 2016).
Finally, we can obtain multi-view aggregated cost via view
weights (Xu and Tao 2019) and further leverage propagation
and refinement to update depth with the minimum cost.
Differently, the deformable PM method (Wang et al.
2023) calculates costs by constructing multiple patches cen-
tered on different anchors to form the deformed patches. An-
chors are reliable pixels identified by a spoke-like searching
strategy centered on unreliable pixel p with θ as the radius.
Then the deformable matching cost is calculated as:
mij(p, S) = λm(p, W) + (1 −λ)
P
s∈S m(s, Ws)
|S|
,
(3)
where S is a collection of anchors. Both W and Ws share the
same window size w×w while respectively have intervals w
2
and 2. In experiment, w = 11, λ = 0.25, θ = 45◦, |S| = 8.

<!-- page 4 -->
Figure 3: Multi-Granularity Segmentation Prior. From (a) to (d), purple, green and gray backgrounds respectively denote homo-
geneous areas, heterogeneous areas and depth edges, with sectors divided at fixed angle 45◦by black dash lines. In (c), purple,
blue, and green dots respectively denote pixels whose optimal anchor subsets Smax equals S1, S2, and S3. Since most pixels
are purple in (c) (i.e., Smax = S1), the scene-level masks M a
1 and M b
1 in (b) are reliable, while others are misidentified masks.
Method
The overview of the proposed method is illustrated in Fig. 2,
and each component will be detailed in subsequent sections.
Multi-granularity Segmentation Prior
As shown in Fig. 3 (a), since APD-MVS lacks depth edge
guidance, its anchors typically skip depth edges to be se-
lected within green heterogeneous areas, causing potential
inaccuracy. Therefore, we attempt to extract depth edges as
guidance for patch deformation. However, without accurate
depth maps, it is rather difficult to extract depth edges. Al-
though depth edges and image edges have a certain degree of
co-occurrence, they are easily confused by factors such as il-
lumination, shadow, occlusion, etc. Differently, by introduc-
ing semantic awareness and granularity richness, Semantic-
SAM can achieve panoramic segmentation at any granular-
ity level, which may contain potential depth edges. There-
fore, we attempt to adopt Semantic-SAM to extract multi-
granularity depth edges for patch deformation.
Edge Aggregation.
As shown in Fig. 3, we first employ
Semantic-SAM for panoramic segmentation on input im-
age Ii in (e) to generate mask maps in (f), (g) and (h)
with varying granularities from coarse to fine (i.e., scene, in-
stance and feature level). Then we have {Mn|n = 1, 2, 3},
where Mn denotes the nth mask map. In addition, we fur-
ther apply a transformation function τ to identify the bound-
aries of different mask maps Mn. Mathematically, Bn =
τ (Mn) = {(x, y) | ∆Mn(x, y) ̸= 0} ,, where ∆represents
the Laplace operator. Then we have {Bn = τ(Mn)|n =
1, 2, 3}, where Bn denotes the nth boundary map. Then for
each unreliable pixel p in Ii, we first construct an anchor
subset Sn for the nth boundary map Bn. Subsequently, we
utilize the nth boundary map Bn to determine whether each
anchor si ∈S is retained. Specifically, an anchor si can
only be retained if its line l, connecting it with the center
pixel p, does not intersect with Bn; otherwise, we discard
it. As shown in Fig. 3 (b), All retained si form Sn, de-
fined by: {si ∈Sn | l ∩Bn = ∅}. Therefore, we have
{Mn, Bn, Sn|n = 1, 2, 3}.
We then attempt to obtain the optimal anchor subset Smax
based on the reliability of anchor distributions for different
anchor subsets. Specifically, we perform RANSAC-based
planarization on all anchors in Sn to obtain the number of
anchors classified as inliers, termed as An. Then we con-
sider that Smax should maximize the number of inliers An
and maximize the proportion of inliers An
|Sn|, defined by:
Smax = arg max
Sn

max (An) s.t. max
 An
|Sn|

.
(4)
However, directly replacing S with Smax could render de-
formed patches susceptible to noise disturbances or local-
minimum. Instead, a more robust approach involves merg-
ing different mask maps Mn, thereby forming an aggregated
segmentation image that offers enhanced guidance. There-
fore, we define M k
n as the kth label in the nth layer mask
map. Subsequently, as depicted on the right side of Fig. 3 (c),
we retain M k
n only if nth layer contains the highest number
of optimal anchor subsets among all layers, formulated by:
M k
n =
(
1,
if n = arg maxl
P
p∈M k
l I (Smax = Sl)

;
0,
else.
(5)
where I(·) is the indicator function such that I(true) = 1 and
I(false) = 0. Therefore, reliable masks that maximize the
quantity of Smax are effectively retained. Finally, as shown
in Fig. 3 (i), by aggregating all label masks among all layers,
we effectively obtain the aggregated image, which is then
further used by function τ to derive the aggregated bound-
ary map: B′ = τ(SK
k=1
PN
n=1 M k
n). B′ is then adopted as
the multi-granularity segmentation prior to constrain each

<!-- page 5 -->
unreliable pixel p in Ii to obtain the new anchor collection
S′ for patch deformation as shown in Fig. 3 (d). Although S′
contains fewer anchors than S, it significantly enhances the
anchor’s reliability. Compared with APD-MVS in Fig. 3 (a),
our edge-confined patch deformation in Fig. 3 (d) effectively
avoids unexpected edge-skipping and constraints patch de-
formation in homogeneous areas, thus avoiding distortion.
Edge Refinement.
Moreover, to better align the integrated
edges with their actual depth edges, we further propose an
edge refinement strategy leveraging the conditional random
field (CRF) algorithm. CRF is composed of both unary po-
tential and pairwise potential. The unary potential ψu (li)
represents the probability of the pixel p being assigned to the
label li. The pairwise potential ψp (li, lj) describes the joint
probability of two adjacent pixels p and q being categorized
as label li and lj, respectively. Since edges primarily exhibit
depth and color differences, we incorporate both geometry
and color similarities for edge refinement, such that:
ψp (li, lj) = µ (li, lj) · e−(t· ∥Dp−Dq∥
α
+ 1
t · ∥Ip·Iq−1∥
β
),
(6)
where Dp, Dq, Ip and Iq respectively denote the depth and
normalized RGB colors of pixels p and q, t is the current
iteration number, µ (li, lj) is the label compatibility function
defined in (Zhu et al. 2023). Finally, as shown in Fig. 3 (j),
by minimizing both ψu (li) and ψp (li, lj) among all pixels,
we identify the optimal label assignment, thereby generating
fine-grained depth edges for accurate patch deformation. A
detailed description is available in supplementary material.
Attention-Consistent Patch Deformation
Although edge-confined patch deformation in Fig. 4 (b) ef-
fectively improves the reliability of deformed patches com-
pared to APD-MVS in Fig. 4 (a), it may cause the loss of
anchors within sectors fully enclosed by depth edges. Ad-
dressing this, we propose adaptive equidistribution, which
uniformly divides the homogeneous area of each unreliable
pixel into eight sectors based on the number of its surround-
ing reliable pixels to recover previously-discarded anchors.
Adaptive Equidistribution.
Specifically, as shown in Fig.
4 (b), centered on unreliable pixel p, we first emit 8 rays at
fixed angle 45◦for sector division. We then define the first
reliable pixel or depth edge encountered by each ray as the
boundary pixel. Thus, we have all sector angles Θ = {θi |
i = 1 · · · 8}, sectors V = {Vi | i = 1 · · · 8}, and boundary
pixels B = {bi, bi+1 | i = 1 · · · 8}. Subsequently, for sector
Vi, if either its boundary pixels bi or bi+1 is located on depth
edges rather than reliable pixels, we consider Vi to be fully
enclosed by depth edges and contain no reliable pixels. Oth-
erwise, we consider Vi to be fully enclosed by a certain num-
ber of reliable pixels, denoted as ni. Since reliable pixels are
typically continuously distributed, ni can be approximately
estimated as the L1 distance between two boundary pixels
bi and bi+1. Moreover, we can obtain the average number
of all reliable pixels ¯d among all sectors V. Then through
the weighted averaging of all reliable pixels, we can propor-
tionally recalculate all angles Θ′ = {θ′
i | i = 1 · · · 8} and
 
Figure 4: Attention-Consistent Patch Deformation. Blue and
red dots respectively denote the central pixel and anchors.
purple, green and gray backgrounds respectively denote ho-
mogeneous areas, heterogeneous areas and depth edges.
in turn acquire new sectors V′ and boundary pixels P′ for
allocation. The kth rectified angle θ′
k is calculated by:
θ′
k = θ′
k−1 + k ¯d −Px−1
i=1 di
dx
,
x−1
X
i=1
di ⩽k ¯d <
x
X
i=1
di.
(7)
Iterating the above process several times we obtain Fig. 4 (c),
where each sector is assigned a roughly equal number of re-
liable pixels to ensure a balanced division without wastage.
Disassemble-Clustering.
After adaptive equidistribution,
all anchors including the removed ones are evenly allocated.
However, since each sector only selects one anchor to con-
struct the deformed patch, a single patch typically fails to
comprehensively capture the characteristics of all reliable
pixels within its sector, thus causing insufficient attention.
Addressing this issue, we first quadruple the number of
anchors within each sector to disassemble each anchor-
centered patch into four smaller sub-patches. We then fur-
ther perform clustering on all anchors to obtain eight anchor
clusters that served as the new deformed patches with at-
tention consistency. Specifically, we apply RANSAC-based
planarization on all quadrupled anchors within V′ to derive
the optimal plane π. Subsequently, we take ε as a threshold
to filter out outliers, selecting anchors whose distance to π
is less than ε as reliable anchors for subsequently clustering.
Here we adopt the density-based DBSCAN algorithm for
clustering, which is robust against noise and more suitable
for randomly distributed anchors compared to K-means.
Specifically, anchors with η neighbors within radius γ are
classified as core points. These core points are then con-
nected if they are within γ of each other to form different
clusters. Other unconnected points are either integrated into

<!-- page 6 -->
existing clusters if they are within γ of any connected core
points, or form an independent cluster if isolated from each
other. The above process will iteratively repeat to obtain N
anchor clusters, defined by U = {Ui | i = 1, . . . , N},
each comprising ki anchor that K = {ki | i = 1, . . . , N},
as shown in Fig. 4 (d). For cluster Ui, all its anchors are
S′
i = {sij | j = 1, . . . , ki}, with their patch size set to w
ki to
balance attention, thereby avoiding patches overlapping with
each other in dense areas. Ultimately, the aggregation of all
anchors within all clusters S′′ = PN
i=1 S′
i will replaces S′
for attention-consistent patch deformation. Comparing with
Fig. 4 (b), the sub-patches in Fig. 4 (d) provides more bal-
anced coverage of reliable pixels in homogeneous areas.
Disparity-Sampling Synergistic 3D Optimization
Fig. 5 (a) depicts a close-up view of pixel p selecting one of
its anchor pixels si for patch deformation. Centered on si, a
sub-patch is constructed and fixed-interval sampling pixels
are adopted for cost computation. Subsequently, as shown in
the cyan line of Fig. 5 (b), by assigning varying disparities to
these sampling pixels, APD-MVS constructs a cost profile in
2D space to help identify ’global’ minimum matching costs.
However, fixed-interval sampling pixels typically fail to
globally represent the features of its sub-patch. Therefore,
its cost profile is completely different from the optimal cost
profile (i.e. the red line of Fig. 5 (b)) which reflects the real
matching cost, thereby causing costs to be trapped in a local
minimum rather than the global minimum. Addressing this,
we attempt to synergistically optimize sampling pixels and
disparities to construct multiple cost profiles in 3D space,
thereby identifying the real global-minimum matching cost.
Considering identifying optimal sampling pixels in sub-
patches is a discrete optimization problem, we employ itera-
tive local search for optimization, which is achieved by per-
forming random perturbation on current solutions and mini-
mizing an objective function to identify the global optimum.
Sampling Pixel Randomization.
Specifically, as shown
in Fig. 5 (c), to maintain the total number of sampling pix-
els within deformed patches, we first assign each anchor-
centered sub-patch in cluster Ui a certain number of sam-
pling pixels, calculated as
9
ki . These sampling pixels are
initially positioned randomly for cost computation, which
we refer to as x0. Next, we generate multiple solutions by
randomly shuffling their positions to acquire a solution set
X = {xj | j = 1, . . . , J}. For each solution xj, given pixel
p and current disparity d, we construct a disparity sequence
D centered on d with length µ and interval δ, defined as:
D =

di | di = d +

i −µ + 1
2

· δ, , i = 1, 2, . . . , µ

.
(8)
Subsequently, for each solution xj, we apply each disparity
di in the sequence D on xj for cost computation, thereby
yielding a cost profile Cj = {ci | i = 1, . . . , µ} and corre-
sponding average cost ¯cj. By aggregating all solutions, we
have {(xj, Cj, ¯cj) | j = 1, . . . , J}. Since we introduce mul-
tiple solutions xj to construct distinct 2D cost profiles Cj,
this can be considered to be a 3D optimization problem.
 
Figure 5: Disparity-Sampling Synergistic 3D Optimization.
(a) and (b) respectively represent the fixed sampling pattern
and 2D cost optimization employed by APD-MVS. (c) and
(d) respectively illustrate the sampling pixel randomization
and 3D cost profile optimization of our proposed method.
3D Cost Profile Optimization.
By comparing cost pro-
files of different solutions, we can identify the best sampling
solution for cost computation, as illustrated in Fig. 5 (d). The
optimal cost profile is defined as the one that minimizes cost
while maximizing variance. The minimum cost indicates the
best matching results, whereas the maximum variance signi-
fies the lowest matching ambiguity. Specifically, the objec-
tive function for the cost profile Cj of solution xj is:
F(xj) =
µ
X
i=1
ci + ω
µ
X
i=1
(ci −¯c)−2.
(9)
Finally, by evaluating minxj∈X F (xj) we determine the op-
timal solution xj among all X, which will replace the initial
solution x0 in subsequent optimization. Through multiple it-
erations, we can progressively refine the sampling pixel po-
sitions and approach the global-minimum matching cost.
Experiment
Datasets and Implementation Details
We evaluate our work on the ETH3D benchmark (Schops
et al. 2017) and the Tanks & Temples benchmark (TNT)
(Knapitsch et al. 2017). We compare our method against re-
cent learning-based methods like PatchMatchNet, IterMVS,
MVSTER, AA-RMVSNet, EPP-MVSNet, EPNet and tra-
ditional methods like TAPA-MVS, PCF-MVS, ACMM,
ACMP, ACMMP, SD-MVS, APD-MVS and HPM-MVS.
Our method is implemented on a machine with an Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Silver 4210 CPU and eight NVIDIA GeForce RTX

<!-- page 7 -->
Figure 6: An illustration of qualitative results on partial scenes of ETH3D datasets (office, pipes and kicker). Partial challeng
areas are shown in red boxes. Our method can effectively reconstruct large textureless areas without introducing detail distortion.
Method
Train
Test
F1
Comp.
Acc.
F1
Comp.
Acc.
PatchMatchNet
64.21
65.43
64.81
73.12
77.46
69.71
IterMVS-LS
71.69
66.08
79.79
80.06
76.49
84.73
MVSTER
72.06
76.92
68.08
79.01
82.47
77.09
EPP-MVSNet
74.00
67.58
82.76
83.40
81.79
85.47
EPNet
79.08
79.28
79.36
83.72
87.84
80.37
TAPA-MVS
77.69
71.45
85.88
79.15
74.94
85.71
PCF-MVS
79.42
75.73
84.11
80.38
79.29
82.15
ACMM
78.86
70.42
90.67
80.78
74.34
90.65
ACMMP
83.42
77.61
90.63
85.89
81.49
91.91
SD-MVS
86.94
84.52
89.63
88.06
87.49
88.96
HPM-MVS++
87.09
85.64
88.74
89.02
89.37
88.93
APD-MVS (base)
86.84
84.83
89.14
87.44
85.93
89.54
MSP-MVS (ours)
88.09
87.87
88.51
89.51
90.38
89.08
Table 1: Quantitative results on ETH3D dataset at threshold
2cm. Our method achieves the highest F1 and completeness.
3090 GPUs. Experiments are performed on original images
in both ETH3D dataset and TNT dataset. In cost calculation,
we adopt the matching strategy of every other row and col-
umn. We take APD-MVS (Wang et al. 2023) as our baseline.
Results on ETH3D and TNT
Qualitative results on ETH3D are illustrated in Fig. 6. It is
evident that our method delivers the most complete and real-
istic reconstructed point clouds, especially in large texture-
less areas like the floors and walls, without introducing detail
distortions. More qualitative results on the ETH3D and TNT
dataset can be referred to in the supplementary material.
Quantitative results on the ETH3D and the TNT datasets
are respectively presented in Tab. 1 and Tab. 2. Note that the
first group is learning-based methods and the second is tradi-
tional methods. Meanwhile, we mark the best results in bold
and underline the second-best results. Our method achieves
the highest F1 score and completeness on the ETH3D dataset
and the TNT Intermediate dataset, validating its state-of-the-
art performance and strong generalization capability. Mean-
while, our method achieves the second best results in the
Method
Intermediate
Advanced
F1
Rec.
Pre.
F1
Rec.
Pre.
PatchMatchNet
53.15
69.37
43.64
32.31
41.66
27.27
AA-RMVSNet
61.51
75.69
52.68
33.53
33.01
37.46
IterMVS-LS
56.94
74.69
47.53
34.17
44.19
28.70
MVSTER
60.92
77.50
50.17
37.53
45.90
33.23
EPP-MVSNet
61.68
75.58
53.09
35.72
34.63
40.09
EPNet
63.68
72.57
57.01
40.52
50.54
34.26
ACMM
57.27
70.85
49.19
34.02
34.90
35.63
ACMP
58.41
73.85
49.06
37.44
42.48
34.57
ACMMP
59.38
68.50
53.28
37.84
44.64
33.79
SD-MVS
63.31
76.63
53.78
40.18
47.37
35.53
HPM-MVS++
61.59
73.79
54.01
39.65
41.09
40.79
APD-MVS (base)
63.64
75.06
55.58
39.91
49.41
33.77
MSP-MVS (ours)
64.48
76.42
56.21
40.26
51.20
33.38
Table 2: Quantitative results on TNT dataset at given thresh-
old. Our method achieves the highest F1 and completeness.
TNT advanced datasets, falling short by 0.26% in F1 score
compared to EPNet (Su and Tao 2023).
Memory & Runtime Comparison
To visually demonstrate the reconstruction quality between
different methods, we present the quantitative results of
our approach against other methods on both the ETH3D
and Tanks & Temples (TNT) datasets, as shown in Fig. 7
(a) and Fig. 7 (b), respectively. As illustrated, our method
achieves the highest F1 scores on both the ETH3D and TNT
datasets, outperforming other state-of-the-art methods such
as ACMMP, APD-MVS, SD-MVS, and HPM-MVS, thereby
demonstrating its superior performance and robustness.
Moreover, to demonstrate the efficiency of our method,
we present a comparative analysis of GPU memory usage
and runtime on ETH3D training datasets, as shown in Fig.
7 (c). All experiments are performed on original-resolution
images, with the number of images standardized to 10 across
all scenarios for runtime evaluation. Additionally, to ensure
fairness, all methods are tested on the same system, with its
hardware configuration detailed in the previous section.

<!-- page 8 -->
Figure 7: Comparative analysis. (a) and (b) respectively illustrate F1 scores among different methods on ETH3D and Tanks &
Temples datasets. (c) depicts their corresponding GPU memory usage (GB) and runtime (second) on ETH3D training datasets.
Concerning learning-based methods, although IterMVS-
LS has the shortest runtime, its memory usage exceeds the
maximum capacity of mainstream GPUs. Similarly, other
learning-based methods also struggle with excessive mem-
ory consumption, making them impractical for large-scale
reconstructions. Regarding traditional methods, while our
method requires approximately one-third more time than its
baseline, APD-MVS, its memory usage significantly out-
performs most methods, including ACMMP, SD-MVS, and
HPM-MVS. Thus, our approach can achieve state-of-the-art
performance with acceptable runtime and minimal memory
consumption, proving its effectiveness and practicality.
Ablation Study
Tab. 4 presents the ablation studies of each proposed compo-
nent. Here we primarily use F1 score for overall comparison.
Multi-granularity Segmentation Prior
We separately
remove edge aggregation (w/o. Agr.), edge refinement (w/o.
Ref.) and both (w/o. Mul.). w/o. Mul. produces the worst re-
sults, highlighting the effectiveness of multi-granularity seg-
mentation prior for edge-confined patch deformation. w/o.
Ref. performs better than w/o. Agr., indicating that edge ag-
gregation exhibit a greater impact than edge refinement.
Attention-Consistent Patch Deformation
We respec-
tively exclude the module of adaptive equidistribution (w/o.
Eqd.), disassemble-clustering (w/o. Clu.) and both (w/o.
Con.). w/o. Con. results in the poorest performance, demon-
strating the significant impact of attention-consistent patch
deformation. w/o. Clu. slightly outperforms w/o. Eqd., yet
both fall short to MSP-MVS, implying that adaptive equidis-
tribution contributes more than disassemble-clustering.
Disparity-Sampling Synergistic 3D Optimization
We
respectively eliminate the variance component (w/o. Var.)
and cost component (w/o. Cst.) in objective function, the
whole module (w/o. Syn.) and set µ = 3. Due to the absence
of 3D optimization, w/o. Syn. achieves the poorest results.
w/o. Var. yields better results than w/o. Cst., suggesting that
cost plays a more critical role than variance during cost opti-
mization. Moreover, µ = 3 are inferior to µ = 5 (MSP-MVS),
indicating the necessity of cost profile aggregation.
Method
2cm
10cm
F1
Comp.
Acc.
F1
Comp.
Acc.
w/o. Mul.
86.53
84.32
89.06
96.59
95.25
97.95
w/o. Agr.
87.07
85.88
88.48
97.01
96.38
97.64
w/o. Ref.
87.54
86.94
88.36
97.32
97.05
97.59
w/o. Con.
86.61
86.49
86.91
96.77
96.88
96.66
w/o. Eqd.
87.23
87.08
87.58
97.16
97.25
97.08
w/o. Clu.
87.29
87.16
87.62
97.21
97.29
97.14
w/o. Syn.
86.94
87.29
86.8
96.9
97.33
96.47
w/o. Var.
87.17
87.41
87.15
97.07
97.46
96.68
w/o. Cst.
87.49
87.6
87.57
97.28
97.55
97.02
µ = 3
87.73
87.53
88.13
97.42
97.59
97.25
MSP-MVS
88.09
87.87
88.51
97.70
97.74
97.67
Table 3: Quantitative results of the ablation studies on
ETH3D benchmark to validate each proposed component.
Conclusion
In this paper, we introduce MSP-MVS, a method leverag-
ing multi-granularity segmentation prior for edge-confined
patch deformation. We first aggregate and refine multi-
granularity depth edges via Semantic-SAM as prior to guide
patch deformation within homogeneous areas. Moreover, we
implement adaptive equidistribution for sector division and
disassemble-clustering for anchor clustering to enable patch
deformation with attention consistency. Additionally, we
propose disparity-sampling synergistic 3D optimization to
help deformed patches identify global-minimum matching
costs. Results on ETH3D and Tanks & Temples benchmarks
validate the state-of-the-art performance of our method.
Acknowledgements
This work was supported in part by the National Natu-
ral Science Foundation of China under Grant 62172392, in
part by the Strategic Priority Research Program of the Chi-
nese Academy of Sciences under Grant No. XDA0450203,
in part by the Innovation Program of Chinese Academy
of Agricultural Sciences (Grant No. CAAS-CSSAE-202401
and CAAS-ASTIP-2024-AII), and in part by the Beijing
Smart Agriculture Innovation Consortium Project (Grant
No. BAIC10-2024).

<!-- page 9 -->
Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material, we significantly expand
upon the related work discussed in the main paper to provide
a comprehensive view of the research landscape surrounding
MSP-MVS. We structure this discussion into two main sec-
tions. The first section, ”Expanded Related Work,” situates
our method within the direct lineage of 3D computer vision,
from classical geometric principles to modern neural repre-
sentations. The second section, ”Broader Context and Future
Directions,” elevates the perspective, connecting MSP-MVS
to the paradigm-shifting developments in foundation mod-
els and cross-disciplinary AI research, thereby outlining a
vision for the future of 3D perception.
More Details on Implementation
Our method is implemented on a machine with an Intel(R)
Xeon(R) Silver 4210 CPU and eight NVIDIA GeForce RTX
3090 GPUs. Experiments are performed on original images
in both ETH3D dataset and TNT dataset. In cost calculation,
we adopt the matching strategy of every other row and col-
umn. We take APD-MVS (Wang et al. 2023) as our baseline.
Results on ETH3D and TNT dataset
Fig. 8 demonstrates qualitative comparisons among various
methods on partial scenarios of the ETH3D datasets. Simi-
larly, Fig. 9 and Fig. 10 illustrate the qualitative results in
the intermediate and advanced sets of the Tanks & Tem-
ples datasets, respectively. As can be seen, our method re-
constructs the most complete and realistic point clouds than
other state-of-the-art traditional MVS methods, especially in
recovering large textureless areas such as walls and floors,
without introducing detail distortion, evidencing its strong
effectiveness and robust generalization ability.
Analyses and Discussions
Q1: Compared to fixed interval sampling or global sam-
pling, what is the success rate or accuracy of the adaptive
sampling strategy in Synergistic 3D Optimization?
A1: As shown in Tab. 4, we respectively perform the fixed
interval sampling strategy (Fix.), the global sampling strat-
egy (Glo.) and the adaptive sampling strategy (Apt.) on de-
formed patches of ETH3D training dataset for comparison.
Evidently, the F1 scores of Apt. significantly outperform
Fix., indicating the effectiveness of adaptive sampling strat-
egy. While Glo. achieves a slightly better F1 score than Apt.,
it requires over 5 times the runtime compared to our method,
indicating that our adaptive sampling strategy can achieve
better trade-offs between time efficiency and performance.
Moreover, as shown in Fig. 11, we present different 2D
cost profiles of deformed patches employed by different
sampling strategies for intuitive comparison. Obviously, the
fixed interval sampling strategy (i.e. green line) inevitably
causes cost to fall into a local-minimum. Additionally, while
the cost profile of global sampling strategy (i.e. blue line)
achieves a lower overall cost, both the global and adap-
tive sampling strategies (i.e. red line) can approximate the
global-minimum matching cost. Consequently, our adaptive
Method
2cm
10cm
F1
Comp.
Acc.
F1
Comp.
Acc.
Fix.
86.94
87.29
86.8
96.9
97.33
96.47
Glo.
88.45
88.32
88.78
97.94
98.03
97.85
Apt.
88.09
87.87
88.51
97.70
97.74
97.67
Table 4: Quantitative ablation studies on ETH3D dataset of
different sampling strategies employed in deformed patches.
sampling strategies can identify the global minimum cost
with less time, demonstrating its high efficiency.
Q2: There are already MVS methods based on seman-
tic segmentation like SD-MVS (Yuan et al. 2024a) and
Multi-View SAM (Shvets et al. 2024), what’s our advan-
tage?
A2: While existing methods like SD-MVS and Multi-View
SAM utilize semantic segmentation, they typically lever-
age semantic information at a single granularity, which of-
ten fails to capture comprehensive depth edges in complex
scenarios. In contrast, our approach can integrate and fur-
ther refine semantic information across multiple granulari-
ties, allowing us to aggregate more robust depth edges. For
instance, when reconstructing a book, text and images on its
cover might be mistakenly identified as depth edges by SD-
MVS. However, our MSP-MVS can effectively exclude such
distractions, treating them together as homogeneous areas
for patch deformation, thus improving matching accuracy.
Q3: In the Disassemble-Clustering strategy, what func-
tion does the disassemble operation serve?
A3: The disassemble operation in disassemble-clustering
strategy serves to maintain the overall patch size while al-
lowing our method to select more reliable anchors. By qua-
drupling the number of anchors and disassembling the origi-
nal patch into multiple smaller sub-patches, the disassemble
operation guarantees the deformed patches covering more
reliable pixels without increasing computational complexity.
Q4: How exactly does the conditional random field algo-
rithm achieve edge refinement?
A4: According to (Lafferty, McCallum, and Pereira 2001),
the conditional random field can leverage inter-pixel corre-
lation to refine label distribution, which is achieved by mod-
eling the predictions within a graphical model that illustrates
the dependencies among them.
Specifically, in the main text, we have already defined the
unary potential ψu (li) and the pairwise potential ψp (li, lj).
We then obtain the overall energy function Ψ(L) by aggre-
gating ψu (li) and ψp (li, lj) among all pixels, calculated by:
Ψ(L) =
K
X
i
ψu (li) +
K
X
i,j
ψp (li, lj) .
(10)
By minimizing Ψ(L) CRF effectively achieves edge refine-
ment. To accomplish the minimization process, an observa-
tion sequence X and a corresponding label sequence Y are
defined to express the conditional probability of the model:
P(Y | X) =
1
Z(X) exp
 X
k
λkΨk (Y, X)
!
,
(11)

<!-- page 10 -->
Figure 8: An illustration of the qualitative results on partial scenes of ETH3D datasets (terrace 2, lounge, pipes, meadow,
lecture room, exhibition hall, living room, relief and relief 2). It is obvious that our methods outperform others, especially in
large textureless areas.

<!-- page 11 -->
Figure 9: Reconstructed point clouds results on intermediate set of TNT datasets.

<!-- page 12 -->
Figure 10: Reconstructed point clouds results on advanced set of TNT datasets.

<!-- page 13 -->
Figure 11: Comparative 2D cost profiles of different sam-
pling strategies. The green, blue, red line in left respectively
denote fixed interval, global and our adaptive sampling strat-
egy employed in red deformable PM anchors of right graph.
where X = {x1, x2, ..., xn} and Y = {y1, y2, ..., yn} re-
spectively represents all pixels and their corresponding la-
bels, Ψk (Y, X) denotes the feature function, each feature
function corresponds to a weight λk, and Z(X) is the nor-
malization factor to ensure a valid probability distribution,
computed by summing over all possible label configura-
tions Y . Subsequently, to maximize the prediction accuracy
L(Λ), the algorithm employs the maximization of the log-
likelihood function to optimize the parameters λk. Mathe-
matically, L(Λ) is calculated by:
L(Λ) =
X
(X,Y )
log P(Y | X; Λ) −
1
2η2 ∥Λ∥2,
(12)
where Λ = {λ1, λ2, ..., λk} represents the set of all feature
function weights, η is a regularization term to prevent over-
fitting. The maximization of L(Λ) can be achieved through
the Quasi-Newton method (Sutton and McCallum 2012).
Expanded Related Work
This section contextualizes MSP-MVS within the broader
evolution of Multi-View Stereo (MVS) and 3D scene rep-
resentation. We begin by delving into the advancements in
patch-based MVS, transition to the rise of learning-based 3D
representations, discuss the critical role of semantic and ge-
ometric priors, and conclude with the diverse applications of
these technologies, illustrating the impact and relevance of
robust 3D reconstruction.
Advancements in Patch-based and Hybrid MVS
Tra-
ditional MVS methods have long relied on the PatchMatch
algorithm (Barnes et al. 2009), which iteratively refines
depth estimates by propagating and matching local patches.
However, these methods often falter in texture-poor regions
where patch-based matching becomes ambiguous. To ad-
dress this, hybrid approaches have emerged, augmenting ge-
ometric principles with more robust strategies. Our work,
MSP-MVS, falls into this category by introducing multi-
granularity segmentation priors to guide patch deformation.
This line of research, focusing on enhancing reconstruc-
tion in challenging areas, has seen significant recent activ-
ity. For instance, similar to our use of semantic edges, other
works have proposed using dual-level precision edges to
guide MVS and ensure accurate planarization (Chen et al.
2025a). The core idea of leveraging segmentation for ro-
bust reconstruction is further explored in methods that are
explicitly segmentation-driven, incorporating sophisticated
mechanisms like depth restoration and occlusion handling
to improve results (Yuan et al. 2025c). An earlier precur-
sor to these ideas can be seen in textureless-aware segmen-
tation and correlative refinement guided MVS, which also
highlights the value of semantic understanding in traditional
MVS pipelines. These methods collectively demonstrate a
clear trend: the fusion of high-level semantic guidance with
low-level geometric matching is crucial for achieving state-
of-the-art performance.
The Rise of Learning-based 3D Representations
While
hybrid methods enhance traditional pipelines, the field
has been revolutionized by end-to-end learning-based ap-
proaches. This paradigm shift began with MVS networks
that replaced handcrafted cost functions with learned 3D
cost volumes. Recent advancements in this domain have fo-
cused on improving network architectures, for instance, by
leveraging monocular priors to guide the multi-view pro-
cess (Jiang et al. 2025b) or by incorporating powerful back-
bones like Recurrent Regularization Transformers (Jiang
et al. 2025c) and State Space Models (Jiang et al. 2025a)
to better aggregate information across views.
Concurrently, a new frontier opened with the development
of implicit and explicit neural representations for scenes.
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) offered a way to synthe-
size photorealistic novel views from a continuous volumetric
function, and community efforts have produced comprehen-
sive datasets to benchmark such NeRF-based 3D reconstruc-
tion techniques (Yan et al. 2023). More recently, 3D Gaus-
sian Splatting (GS) has gained immense popularity due to its
ability to achieve real-time rendering with high fidelity. Re-
search in this direction is rapidly expanding, with a focus on
several key areas. These include developing lightweight and
compact models for large-scale dynamic 4D scenes through
context-aware modeling (Liu et al. 2025c,c), enabling real-
time video representation at high frame rates through de-
formable 2D Gaussians (Liu et al. 2025d), and creating in-
tuitive tools for controllable 3D scene editing (Yan et al.
2024b). Furthermore, efforts are being made to enhance
the structural integrity of GS reconstructions by leveraging
topological concepts like persistent homology (Shen et al.
2025), and to unify appearance codes with bilateral grids for
complex driving scene reconstruction (Wang et al. 2025d).
A critical challenge is extending these representations to
encompass not just static scenes but the world’s dynam-
ics, leading to the development of world models with self-
supervised 3D labels for robotics applications (Yan et al.
2025). Bridging the gap between these new representations
and classic computer vision tasks, recent work has also fo-
cused on performing object segmentation directly on the
Gaussian representation, guided by gradient information to
enhance boundary precision (Li et al. 2024), and enabling
spatio-temporal decoupling for real-time dynamic scene ren-
dering (Li et al. 2025d).
Semantic and Geometric Priors in 3D Perception
The
core innovation of MSP-MVS is the use of multi-granularity
priors from Semantic-SAM. This highlights a broader prin-
ciple: leveraging structured information is key to solving ill-

<!-- page 14 -->
posed perception problems. This principle is widely applied
across various domains. In the context of segmentation, for
instance, researchers have explored scaling up autoregres-
sive pretraining for complex structures like neurons (Chen
et al. 2025e), using dual-form complementary masking for
domain-adaptive image segmentation (Wang et al. 2025a),
and employing multi-agent reinforcement learning for self-
supervised segmentation (Chen et al. 2023).
Beyond segmentation, graph-based models offer a pow-
erful way to represent structural relationships. Techniques
such as multi-scale graph learning for challenging tasks
like anti-sparse downscaling (Fan et al. 2025) demonstrate
the versatility of graph structures. In the realm of graph
autoencoders, revisiting masking strategies from a robust-
ness perspective (Song et al. 2025b) and developing self-
purified models to release robust expression power (Song
et al. 2025d) have pushed the boundaries of representa-
tion learning. For composed image and video retrieval, a
deep understanding of fine-grained semantics is paramount.
This has led to methods that explicitly parse modification
semantics (Li et al. 2025c), perform visual-semantic de-
composition and partial alignment (Qu et al. 2024), disen-
tangle representations with complementarity guidance (Fu
et al. 2025), utilize hierarchical uncertainty-aware disam-
biguation (Chen et al. 2025g), revise focus shifts based on
segmentation (Chen et al. 2025f), and mine entity and modi-
fication relations (Li et al. 2025b). These diverse approaches
underscore the universal importance of leveraging semantic
and structural priors, a principle that lies at the heart of our
MSP-MVS.
Applications of 3D Reconstruction and Perception
The
ultimate goal of advancing 3D perception is to enable robust
real-world applications. Autonomous Driving is a primary
beneficiary. Accurate 3D reconstruction and perception are
essential for building online HD maps (Zhang et al. 2025a),
predicting trajectories from a cross-view perspective (Song
et al. 2023), and estimating depth under adverse weather
conditions through curriculum contrastive learning (Wang
et al. 2024a). This same line of inquiry has also explored
the synergy between contrastive learning and diffusion mod-
els for even more robust depth estimation, demonstrating the
rapid evolution of perception techniques in this area (Wang
et al. 2024b). Recent work even explores transforming im-
age editors into dense geometry estimators (Wang et al.
2025c) and leveraging adversarial transfer for end-to-end
driving models (Zhang et al. 2025c). Simplified yet effec-
tive models with distinct experts and implicit interactions
are also being developed to tackle the complexity of end-to-
end driving (Zhang et al. 2025d).
In Remote Sensing, multi-view graph clustering with
dual relation optimization (Guan et al. 2025a), structure-
adaptive multi-view graph clustering (Guan et al. 2025c),
and sampling-enhanced contrastive clustering with long-
short range information mining (Guan et al. 2025b) are all
techniques developed to handle the unique challenges of
satellite and aerial imagery. The development of interactive
agents for comprehensive change interpretation and analy-
sis (Liu et al. 2024a) and comprehensive surveys on spa-
tiotemporal vision-language models for remote sensing (Liu
et al. 2025b) further highlight the rapid progress in this field.
Diffusion models are also being used for controllable image
generation (Tang et al. 2024) and to enhance object detection
through data generation (Tang et al. 2025).
Finally, in Robotics and Human-Object Interaction (HOI),
discovering syntactic interaction clues (Luo et al. 2024a) and
employing synergistic prompting learning (Luo et al. 2025a)
are crucial for enabling machines to understand and interact
with their environment in a human-like manner.
In summary, this expanded review situates MSP-MVS
at the confluence of several critical research streams. By
building upon the robust foundations of patch-based MVS
while integrating high-level semantic priors, our work ad-
dresses long-standing challenges in textureless reconstruc-
tion. It stands as a complementary approach to the concur-
rent rise of learning-based representations like NeRF and
Gaussian Splatting, offering a pathway that prioritizes ge-
ometric accuracy and computational efficiency. As demon-
strated by the diverse and demanding applications in au-
tonomous driving and remote sensing, the need for reliable
and precise 3D perception remains paramount. MSP-MVS
contributes a significant step forward in this direction, prov-
ing that the principles of guided geometric matching remain
highly relevant in the modern 3D vision landscape.
Broader Context and Future Directions: The Role
of Foundation Models and Cross-Disciplinary
Insights
Having situated MSP-MVS within the context of 3D vision,
we now broaden our perspective to discuss its connections
to the wider trends in artificial intelligence. This section
explores how the rise of foundation models, advances in
general learning paradigms, and insights from specialized,
cross-disciplinary domains are poised to shape the future of
MVS and 3D perception at large.
The Era of Vision-Language Models (VLMs): To-
wards Language-Guided 3D Systems
The rise of Large
Language Models (LLMs) and Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) is reshaping computer vision. The ability of these
models to reason, follow instructions, and process multi-
modal information offers exciting possibilities for MVS.
Our use of Semantic-SAM is a step in this direction, but
future systems could be guided by more complex, natu-
ral language commands. Research into VLM capabilities
is vast, spanning from enhancing LLMs’ confidence on
edited facts (Bi et al. 2024b) and aligning them for context-
faithfulness (Bi et al. 2024a) to controlling knowledge re-
liance through fine-grained mechanisms (Bi et al. 2025c)
and promoting exploration to improve multi-domain reason-
ing (Bi et al. 2025b).
VLMs are being applied to a wide array of tasks that hint
at their potential for 3D. This includes versatile advertis-
ing poster layout generation (Anonymous 2025), explain-
able visual question answering via diffusion-based chain-
of-thought (Lu, Lu, and Luo 2024), and challenging VLMs’
spatial intelligence through complex reasoning tasks (Song
et al. 2025e). For specific applications, VLMs are being

<!-- page 15 -->
used for document-based zero-shot learning by progres-
sively optimizing prompts (Qu et al. 2025a) and leverag-
ing multi-attribute document supervision (Qu et al. 2025b).
Instruction-based learning is also proving effective for com-
plex tasks like HOI detection (Luo et al. 2025b). The syn-
ergy between retrieval mechanisms and preference opti-
mization is being used to better align VLMs (Xing et al.
2025), and hierarchical cross-modal alignment is being
developed for decoupled multimodal representation learn-
ing (Qian et al. 2025c). The most direct link to 3D is seen
in generative text-guided 3D vision-language pretraining for
medical image segmentation (Chen et al. 2025d), which
paves the way for future language-guided 3D reconstruction
systems.
Advanced Learning Paradigms and Their Implications
for MVS
Beyond VLMs, advances in general machine
learning paradigms offer promising directions for MVS.
Data-centric AI emphasizes the quality of training data. This
includes learning to refine pre-training data at scale from
expert-guided programs (Bi et al. 2025a) and developing ro-
bust digital watermarking frameworks resistant to extreme
cropping, scaling (Sun et al. 2025b), and non-differentiable
distortions (Sun et al. 2025a) to ensure data integrity.
In terms of model architectures and training, new mod-
els like the diffusion Mamba for end-to-end multi-modal
tasks (Lu et al. 2025) and lightweight model transition meth-
ods to improve LLM training via weight scaling (Li et al.
2025a) could lead to more efficient and powerful MVS net-
works. Furthermore, in the realm of graph-based learning,
research into elevating the resilience of graph prompt tuning
against adversarial attacks (Song et al. 2025a) is critical for
building robust systems.
Finally, the concept of intelligent agents is gaining trac-
tion. This includes the development of world cognition
agents enabling adaptive human-AI symbiosis in industrial
settings (Liu et al. 2025a) and comprehensive surveys on
pure Vision Language Action (VLA) models (Zhang et al.
2025b). Such agents could one day perform 3D reconstruc-
tion as a tool to achieve a broader goal. For autonomous driv-
ing, VLA models are being developed to incentivize reason-
ing and self-reflection (Yuan et al. 2025b), while physical
autoregressive models are being created for robotic manip-
ulation without action pretraining (Song et al. 2025f). Rein-
forcing open-vocabulary action recognition with tools is an-
other step towards more capable and generalist agents (Yuan
et al. 2025a).
Cross-Disciplinary Insights from Specialized Domains
Often, solutions developed for niche problems can inspire
general-purpose algorithms. Medical Imaging, a field with
unique challenges like extreme low-texture regions and
noisy labels, is a fertile ground for such insights. Techniques
developed for medical image segmentation, such as lever-
aging the frequency domain (Han et al. 2025b), estimating
region uncertainty to handle noisy labels (Han et al. 2025c),
and using adaptive label correction (Qian et al. 2025a), could
be adapted to improve the robustness of MVS in ambigu-
ous scenarios. Similarly, curriculum learning frameworks
for imbalanced multimodal diagnosis (Qian et al. 2025b;
Han et al. 2025a) could inspire new training strategies for
MVS on unbalanced datasets. For cryo-electron tomogra-
phy, a field with notoriously low signal-to-noise ratio, meth-
ods for self-supervised volumetric image restoration (Yang,
Zhang, and Han 2021), denoising based on noise modeling
and transfer (Li et al. 2022b; Yang et al. 2024d), and im-
proved denoising with simulation-aware pretraining (Yang
et al. 2024b) are highly relevant to MVS’s own struggle with
noise and texturelessness. Furthermore, the use of sparse
and hierarchical transformers for survival analysis on whole
slide images (Yan et al. 2024a) and the fusion of multi-scale
heterogeneous pathology foundation models (Yang et al.
2025) offer architectural ideas for efficient multi-scale fea-
ture aggregation. The development of evolutionary medical
prompt optimization (Chen et al. 2025b) showcases a pow-
erful method for automatically tailoring inputs to large mod-
els, a technique detailed in related publications (Chen et al.
2025c) that could be applied to guide future 3D generative
systems.
Insights also come from other industrial applications.
For example, efficient hybrid-supervised symmetric stereo
matching networks (Zhang et al. 2023a) and effective classi-
fication methods for steel surface defects based on salient
local features (Hao et al. 2024) provide battle-tested so-
lutions for high-precision industrial vision tasks. Even a
cloud framework designed for autonomous driving path
planning (Yang et al. 2024a) points towards the future of
MVS as a service in large-scale, distributed systems. By
drawing inspiration from these diverse fields, the MVS com-
munity can continue to build more robust, efficient, and ver-
satile 3D perception systems. Finally, the principles of con-
trastive learning, enhanced with diffusion models, are being
used for robust depth estimation (Wang et al. 2024a), and
harnessing diffusion priors for self-supervised depth estima-
tion (Wang et al. 2025b) shows another promising direction
for future MVS research.
In conclusion, by viewing MSP-MVS through the lens
of broader AI advancements, we can appreciate its role not
merely as an algorithmic improvement, but as a harbinger of
future 3D perception systems. Its use of a foundation model
for semantic guidance is indicative of a larger trend towards
language-guided, context-aware intelligence. The ongoing
revolutions in advanced learning paradigms and the surpris-
ing yet potent insights from cross-disciplinary fields like
medical imaging provide a rich tapestry of ideas for the next
generation of MVS. The future of 3D reconstruction will
likely involve a deeper symbiosis with large models, more
sophisticated data-centric strategies, and the integration of
reasoning and action capabilities, transforming MVS from
a passive reconstruction tool into an active perception mod-
ule within larger intelligent agents. Our work represents a
concrete step on this exciting path.
References
Anonymous. 2025. AnyLayout: Versatile Advertising Poster
Layout Generation with MLLMs. In Submitted to The Four-
teenth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions. Under review.

<!-- page 16 -->
Bao, L.; Yang, Q.; Jin, H.; and Jin, H. 2014.
Fast
Edge-Preserving Patchmatch for Large Displacement Opti-
cal Flow. In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, 3534–3541.
Barnes, C.; Shechtman, E.; Finkelstein, A.; and Goldman,
D. B. 2009. PatchMatch: A randomized correspondence al-
gorithm for structural image editing. ACM Trans. Graph.,
28(3): 24.
Bi, B.; Huang, S.; Wang, Y.; Yang, T.; Zhang, Z.; Huang, H.;
Mei, L.; Fang, J.; Li, Z.; Wei, F.; et al. 2024a. Context-DPO:
Aligning Language Models for Context-Faithfulness. ACL
2025.
Bi, B.; Liu, S.; Mei, L.; Wang, Y.; Ji, P.; and Cheng, X.
2024b.
Decoding by Contrasting Knowledge: Enhancing
LLMs’ Confidence on Edited Facts. ACL 2025.
Bi, B.; Liu, S.; Ren, X.; Liu, D.; Lin, J.; Wang, Y.; Mei, L.;
Fang, J.; Guo, J.; and Cheng, X. 2025a. RefineX: Learn-
ing to Refine Pre-training Data at Scale from Expert-Guided
Programs. arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.03253.
Bi, B.; Liu, S.; Wang, Y.; Tong, S.; Mei, L.; Ge, Y.; Xu,
Y.; Guo, J.; and Cheng, X. 2025b. Reward and Guidance
through Rubrics: Promoting Exploration to Improve Multi-
Domain Reasoning. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.12344.
Bi, B.; Liu, S.; Wang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Fang, J.; Mei, L.; and
Cheng, X. 2025c.
Parameters vs. context: Fine-grained
control of knowledge reliance in language models. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.15888.
Bleyer, M.; Rhemann, C.; Rother, C.; and Rother, C. 2011.
PatchMatch Stereo - Stereo Matching with Slanted Support
Windows. In Hoey, J.; McKenna, S. J.; and Trucco, E., eds.,
British Mach. Vis. Conf. (BMVC), 1–11.
Cao, C.; Ren, X.; and Fu, Y. 2024.
MVSFormer++: Re-
vealing the Devil in Transformer’s Details for Multi-View
Stereo. arXiv:2401.11673.
Chen, K.; Yuan, Z.; Mao, T.; and Wang, Z. 2025a. Dual-
level precision edges guided multi-view stereo with accurate
planarization. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, 2105–2113.
Chen, M.; Wang, L.; Lei, Y.; Dong, Z.; and Guo, Y. 2024a.
Learning Spherical Radiance Field for Efficient 360◦Un-
bounded Novel View Synthesis. IEEE Transactions on Im-
age Processing.
Chen, M.; Yuan, W.; Wang, Y.; Sheng, Z.; He, Y.; Dong,
Z.; Bo, L.; and Guo, Y. 2024b. Sketch2NeRF: Multi-view
Sketch-guided Text-to-3D Generation. arXiv:2401.14257.
Chen, Y.; He, Y.; Yang, J.; Zhang, D.; Yuan, Z.; Khan, M. A.;
Baili, J.; and Yee, L. 2025b.
EMPOWER: Evolutionary
Medical Prompt Optimization With Reinforcement Learn-
ing. IEEE J. Biomed. Health Inform.
Chen, Y.; He, Y.; Yang, J.; Zhang, D.; Yuan, Z.; Khan, M. A.;
Baili, J.; and Yee, P. L. 2025c. EMPOWER: Evolutionary
Medical Prompt Optimization With Reinforcement Learn-
ing. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics,
1–10.
Chen, Y.; Huang, W.; Liu, X.; Deng, S.; Chen, Q.; and
Xiong, Z. 2024c. Learning multiscale consistency for self-
supervised electron microscopy instance segmentation. In
ICASSP, 1566–1570. IEEE.
Chen, Y.; Huang, W.; Zhou, S.; Chen, Q.; and Xiong, Z.
2023.
Self-supervised neuron segmentation with multi-
agent reinforcement learning. In International Joint Con-
ference on Artificial Intelligence (IJCAI).
Chen, Y.; Liu, C.; Huang, W.; Liu, X.; Shi, H.; Cheng, S.;
Arcucci, R.; and Xiong, Z. 2025d. GTGM: Generative Text-
Guided 3D Vision-Language Pretraining for Medical Image
Segmentation. In IEEE International Conference on Com-
puter Vision Workshop on Vision Language Models for 3D
Understanding (ICCV Workshop VLM3D), 6715–6724.
Chen, Y.; Liu, C.; Liu, X.; Arcucci, R.; and Xiong, Z. 2024d.
Bimcv-r: A landmark dataset for 3d ct text-image retrieval.
In MICCAI, 124–134. Springer.
Chen, Y.; Shi, H.; Liu, X.; Shi, T.; Zhang, R.; Liu, D.; Xiong,
Z.; and Wu, F. 2024e. TokenUnify: Scalable Autoregressive
Visual Pre-training with Mixture Token Prediction. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.16847.
Chen, Y.; Shi, H.; Liu, X.; Shi, T.; Zhang, R.; Liu, D.; Xiong,
Z.; and Wu, F. 2025e. TokenUnify: Scaling Up Autoregres-
sive Pretraining for Neuron Segmentation. In IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 13604–
13613.
Chen, Z.; Hu, Y.; Li, Z.; Fu, Z.; Song, X.; and Nie, L.
2025f. OFFSET: Segmentation-based Focus Shift Revision
for Composed Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of the ACM
International Conference on Multimedia, 6113–6122.
Chen, Z.; Hu, Y.; Li, Z.; Fu, Z.; Wen, H.; and Guan, W.
2025g. HUD: Hierarchical Uncertainty-Aware Disambigua-
tion Network for Composed Video Retrieval. In Proceed-
ings of the ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
6143–6152.
Cheng,
S.;
and
Sun,
H.
2024.
SPT:
Sequence
Prompt Transformer for Interactive Image Segmentation.
arXiv:2412.10224.
Ding, Y.; Yuan, W.; Zhu, Q.; Zhang, H.; Liu, X.; Wang,
Y.; and Liu, X. 2022. Transmvsnet: Global Context-Aware
Multi-View Stereo Network with Transformers. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 8585–8594.
Fan, Y.; Yu, R.; Barclay, J. R.; Appling, A. P.; Sun, Y.; Xie,
Y.; and Jia, X. 2025. Multi-Scale Graph Learning for Anti-
Sparse Downscaling. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, 27969–27977.
Fu, Z.; Li, Z.; Chen, Z.; Wang, C.; Song, X.; Hu, Y.; and Nie,
L. 2025. PAIR: Complementarity-guided Disentanglement
for Composed Image Retrieval. In Proceedings of the IEEE
International Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal
Processing, 1–5. IEEE.
Galliani, S.; Lasinger, K.; and Schindler, K. 2015. Massively
Parallel Multiview Stereopsis by Surface Normal Diffusion.
In Proc. IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ICCV).

<!-- page 17 -->
Gan, W.; Wu, W.; Chen, S.; Zhao, Y.; and Wong, P. K. 2023a.
Rethinking 3D Cost Aggregation in Stereo Matching. Pat-
tern Recognition Letters, 167: 75–81.
Gan, W.; Xu, H.; Huang, Y.; Chen, S.; and Yokoya, N.
2023b.
V4d: Voxel for 4d Novel View Synthesis.
IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics.
Guan, R.; Li, J.; Wang, S.; Tu, W.; Li, M.; Zhu, E.; Liu,
X.; and Chen, P. 2025a. Multi-view Graph Clustering with
Dual Relation Optimization for Remote Sensing Data. In
Proceedings of the 33rd ACM International Conference on
Multimedia, 7346–7355.
Guan, R.; Li, Z.; Tu, W.; Wang, J.; Liu, Y.; Li, X.; Tang,
C.; and Feng, R. 2024a. Contrastive Multiview Subspace
Clustering of Hyperspectral Images Based on Graph Convo-
lutional Networks. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing, 62: 1–14.
Guan, R.; Liu, T.; Tu, W.; Tang, C.; Luo, W.; and Liu, X.
2025b. Sampling Enhanced Contrastive Multi-View Remote
Sensing Data Clustering with Long-Short Range Informa-
tion Mining. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data
Engineering, 1–15.
Guan, R.; Tu, W.; Li, Z.; Yu, H.; Hu, D.; Chen, Y.; Tang,
C.; Yuan, Q.; and Liu, X. 2024b. Spatial-Spectral Graph
Contrastive Clustering with Hard Sample Mining for Hy-
perspectral Images. IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
Remote Sensing, 1–16.
Guan, R.; Tu, W.; Wang, S.; Liu, J.; Hu, D.; Tang, C.; Feng,
Y.; Li, J.; Xiao, B.; and Liu, X. 2025c. Structure-Adaptive
Multi-View Graph Clustering for Remote Sensing Data. In
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence, volume 39, 16933–16941.
Han, K.; Lyu, C.; Ma, L.; Qian, C.; Ma, S.; Pang, Z.; Chen,
J.; and Liu, Z. 2025a. Climd: A curriculum learning frame-
work for imbalanced multimodal diagnosis. In International
Conference on Medical Image Computing and Computer-
Assisted Intervention, 65–74. Springer.
Han, K.; Ma, S.; Qian, C.; Chen, J.; Lyu, C.; Song, Y.; and
Liu, Z. 2025b. Frequency Domain Unlocks New Perspec-
tives for Abdominal Medical Image Segmentation. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2510.11005.
Han, K.; Wang, S.; Chen, J.; Qian, C.; Lyu, C.; Ma, S.; Qiu,
C.; Sheng, V. S.; Huang, Q.; and Liu, Z. 2025c.
Region
uncertainty estimation for medical image segmentation with
noisy labels. IEEE Transactions on Medical Imaging.
Hao, Q.; Gan, Q.; Liu, Z.; Chen, J.; Shen, Q.; Qian, C.;
and Liu, Y. 2024. SSDC-Net: An Effective Classification
Method of Steel Surface Defects Based on Salient Local
Features. In International Conference on Intelligent Com-
puting, 490–503. Springer.
Jiang, J.; Liu, Q.; Liu, H.; Yu, H.; Wang, L.; Chen, J.; and
Ma, H. 2025a. MVSMamba: Multi-View Stereo with State
Space Model. arXiv preprint arXiv:2511.01315.
Jiang, J.; Liu, Q.; Yu, H.; Liu, H.; Wang, L.; Chen, J.;
and Ma, H. 2025b.
MonoMVSNet: Monocular Priors
Guided Multi-View Stereo Network. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), 27806–27816.
Jiang, J.; Wang, L.; Yu, H.; Hu, T.; Chen, J.; and Ma, H.
2025c. RRT-MVS: Recurrent Regularization Transformer
for Multi-View Stereo. In Proceedings of the AAAI Confer-
ence on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39, 3994–4002.
Kang, X.; Luan, Z.; Khoshelham, K.; and Wang, B. 2025.
Equi-GSPR: Equivariant SE(3) Graph Network Model for
Sparse Point Cloud Registration. In Leonardis, A.; Ricci,
E.; Roth, S.; Russakovsky, O.; Sattler, T.; and Varol, G.,
eds., Computer Vision – ECCV 2024, volume 15062, 149–
167. Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland. ISBN 978-3-031-
73234-8 978-3-031-73235-5.
Knapitsch, A.; Park, J.; Zhou, Q.-Y.; and Koltun, V. 2017.
Tanks and Temples: Benchmarking Large-Scale Scene Re-
construction. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36(4):
1–13.
Kuhn, A.; Lin, S.; and Erdler, O. 2019. Plane Completion
and Filtering for Multi-View Stereo Reconstruction. In Pat-
tern Recognition, 18–32.
Lafferty, J.; McCallum, A.; and Pereira, F. 2001. Conditional
Random Fields: Probabilistic Models for Segmenting and
Labeling Sequence Data. In Icml, volume 1, 3.
Li, F.; Zhang, H.; Sun, P.; Zou, X.; Liu, S.; Yang, J.; Li,
C.; Zhang, L.; and Gao, J. 2023. Semantic-Sam: Segment
and Recognize Anything at Any Granularity. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2307.04767.
Li, H.; Zhang, H.; Wan, X.; Yang, Z.; Li, C.; Li, J.; Han,
R.; Zhu, P.; and Zhang, F. 2022a. Noise-Transfer2Clean:
Denoising Cryo-EM Images Based on Noise Modeling and
Transfer. Bioinformatics, 38(7): 2022–2029.
Li, H.; Zhang, H.; Wan, X.; Yang, Z.; Li, C.; Li, J.; Han, R.;
Zhu, P.; and Zhang, F. 2022b. Noise-Transfer2Clean: de-
noising cryo-EM images based on noise modeling and trans-
fer. Bioinformatics, 38(7): 2022–2029.
Li, J.; Tan, J.; Yang, Z.; Sun, P.; Huo, F.; Qin, J.; Sun, Y.;
Xie, Y.; Cai, X.; Zhang, X.; He, M.; Tan, G.; Jia, W.; and
Zhao, T. 2025a. WISCA: A Lightweight Model Transition
Method to Improve LLM Training via Weight Scaling.
Li, Q.; and Zhang, C. 2022.
Continual Learning on
Deployment Pipelines for Machine Learning Systems.
arXiv:2212.02659.
Li, Z.; Chen, Z.; Wen, H.; Fu, Z.; Hu, Y.; and Guan, W.
2025b.
Encoder: Entity mining and modification relation
binding for composed image retrieval. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39,
5101–5109.
Li, Z.; Fu, Z.; Hu, Y.; Chen, Z.; Wen, H.; and Nie,
L. 2025c.
FineCIR: Explicit Parsing of Fine-Grained
Modification Semantics for Composed Image Retrieval.
https://arxiv.org/abs/2503.21309.
Li, Z.; Han, W.; Cai, Y.; Jiang, H.; Bi, B.; Gao, S.; Zhao,
H.; and Wang, Z. 2024. Gradiseg: Gradient-guided gaussian
segmentation with enhanced 3d boundary precision. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.00392.
Li, Z.; Jiang, H.; Cai, Y.; Chen, J.; Bi, B.; Gao, S.; Zhao,
H.; Wang, Y.; Mao, T.; and Wang, Z. 2025d. STDR: Spatio-
Temporal Decoupling for Real-Time Dynamic Scene Ren-
dering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.22400.

<!-- page 18 -->
Li, Z.; Zuo, W.; Wang, Z.; and Zhang, L. 2020. Confidence-
Based Large-Scale Dense Multi-View Stereo. IEEE Trans-
actions on Image Processing, 29: 7176–7191.
Liao, J.; Fu, Y.; Yan, Q.; and Xiao, C. 2019. Pyramid Multi-
View Stereo with Local Consistency. Computer Graphics
Forum, 38(7): 335–346.
Liu, C.; Chen, K.; Zhang, H.; Qi, Z.; Zou, Z.; and Shi, Z.
2024a. Change-Agent: Toward Interactive Comprehensive
Remote Sensing Change Interpretation and Analysis. IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, 62: 1–16.
Liu, C.; Yuan, Z.; Wang, Y.; Yin, Y.; Luo, W.; He, Z.; and
Liang, X. 2025a.
MR-IntelliAssist: A World Cognition
Agent Enabling Adaptive Human-AI Symbiosis in Indus-
try 4.0. In International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction, 163–177. Springer Nature Switzerland Cham.
Liu, C.; Zhang, J.; Chen, K.; Wang, M.; Zou, Z.; and Shi, Z.
2025b. Remote Sensing Spatiotemporal Vision–Language
Models: A comprehensive survey.
IEEE Geoscience and
Remote Sensing Magazine, 2–42.
Liu, M.; Yang, L.; Wang, Y.; Xu, Y.; Wang, Y.-K.; and Guan,
Y. 2024b. StreamOptix: A Cross-layer Adaptive Video De-
livery Scheme. arXiv:2406.04632.
Liu, M.; Yang, L.; Xu, Y.; Wang, Y.-k.; and Hwang, J.-N.
2024c. EVAN: Evolutional Video Streaming Adaptation via
Neural Representation. arXiv:2406.02557.
Liu, M.; Yang, Q.; Huang, H.; Huang, W.; Yuan, Z.; Li, Z.;
and Xu, Y. 2025c. Light4gs: Lightweight compact 4d gaus-
sian splatting generation via context model. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.13948.
Liu, M.; Yang, Q.; Zhao, M.; Huang, H.; Yang, L.; Li, Z.;
and Xu, Y. 2025d. D2gv: Deformable 2d gaussian splat-
ting for video representation in 400fps.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.05600.
Lu, C.; Lu, Q.; Dong, M.; and Luo, J. 2025.
End-to-
End Multi-Modal Diffusion Mamba. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
20529–20540.
Lu, C.; Lu, Q.; and Luo, J. 2024. An Explainable Vision
Question Answer Model via Diffusion Chain-of-Thought.
In European Conference on Computer Vision, 146–162.
Springer.
Lu, H.; Tang, J.; Xu, X.; Cao, X.; Zhang, Y.; Wang, G.;
Du, D.; Chen, H.; and Chen, Y. 2024.
Scaling Multi-
Camera 3D Object Detection through Weak-to-Strong Elic-
iting. arXiv:2404.06700.
Lu, H.; Zhang, Y.; Lian, Q.; Du, D.; and Chen, Y. 2023. To-
wards Generalizable Multi-Camera 3D Object Detection via
Perspective Debiasing. arXiv:2310.11346.
Luo, J.; Ren, W.; Jiang, W.; Chen, X.; Wang, Q.; Han, Z.;
and Liu, H. 2024a. Discovering syntactic interaction clues
for human-object interaction detection. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 28212–28222.
Luo, J.; Ren, W.; Wang, Z.; Chen, X.; Fan, H.; Han, Z.; and
Liu, H. 2025a. Synergistic Prompting Learning for Human-
Object Interaction Detection. IEEE Transactions on Image
Processing.
Luo, J.; Ren, W.; Zheng, Q.; Zhang, Y.; Yuan, Z.; Wang, Z.;
Lu, H.; and Liu, H. 2025b. InstructHOI: Context-Aware In-
struction for Multi-Modal Reasoning in Human-Object In-
teraction Detection. In The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference
on Neural Information Processing Systems.
Luo, M.; Fei, H.; Li, B.; Wu, S.; Liu, Q.; Poria, S.; Cambria,
E.; Lee, M.-L.; and Hsu, W. 2024b. PanoSent: A Panop-
tic Sextuple Extraction Benchmark for Multimodal Con-
versational Aspect-based Sentiment Analysis. In Proceed-
ings of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multi-
media, 7667–7676. Melbourne VIC Australia: ACM. ISBN
9798400706868.
Luo, M.; Zhang, H.; Wu, S.; Li, B.; Han, H.; and Fei, H.
2024c.
NUS-Emo at SemEval-2024 Task 3: Instruction-
Tuning LLM for Multimodal Emotion-Cause Analysis in
Conversations.
In Proceedings of the 18th International
Workshop on Semantic Evaluation (SemEval-2024), 1599–
1606.
Qian, C.; Han, K.; Ding, J.; Lyu, C.; Yuan, Z.; Chen, J.; and
Liu, Z. 2025a. Adaptive label correction for robust medi-
cal image segmentation with noisy labels. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.12218.
Qian, C.; Han, K.; Wang, J.; Yuan, Z.; Lyu, C.; Chen,
J.; and Liu, Z. 2025b.
Dyncim: Dynamic curricu-
lum for imbalanced multimodal learning.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.06456.
Qian, C.; Xing, S.; Li, S.; Zhao, Y.; and Tu, Z. 2025c.
DecAlign: Hierarchical Cross-Modal Alignment for Decou-
pled Multimodal Representation Learning. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.11892.
Qian, H.; Chen, Y.; Lou, S.; Khan, F.; Jin, X.; and Fan,
D.-P. 2024. MaskFactory: Towards High-quality Synthetic
Data Generation for Dichotomous Image Segmentation. In
NeurIPS.
Qu, X.; Gou, G.; Zhuang, J.; Yu, J.; Song, K.; Wang, Q.;
Li, Y.; and Xiong, G. 2025a. ProAPO: Progressively Au-
tomatic Prompt Optimization for Visual Classification. In
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, CVPR 2025, Nashville, TN, USA, June 11-15,
2025, 25145–25155.
Qu, X.; Yu, J.; Gai, K.; Zhuang, J.; Tang, Y.; Xiong, G.; Gou,
G.; and Wu, Q. 2024. Visual-Semantic Decomposition and
Partial Alignment for Document-based Zero-Shot Learning.
In Proceedings of the 32nd ACM International Conference
on Multimedia, MM 2024, Melbourne, VIC, Australia, 28
October 2024 - 1 November 2024, 4581–4590. ACM.
Qu, X.; Yu, J.; Zhuang, J.; Gou, G.; Xiong, G.; and Wu, Q.
2025b. MADS: Multi-Attribute Document Supervision for
Zero-Shot Image Classification. CoRR, abs/2503.06847.
Ren, C.; Xu, Q.; Zhang, S.; and Yang, J. 2023.
Hierar-
chical Prior Mining for Non-Local Multi-View Stereo. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, 3611–3620.
Romanoni, A.; and Matteucci, M. 2019.
Tapa-Mvs:
Textureless-aware Patchmatch Multi-View Stereo. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, 10413–10422.

<!-- page 19 -->
Sch¨onberger, J. L.; Zheng, E.; Frahm, J.-M.; and Pollefeys,
M. 2016. Pixelwise View Selection for Unstructured Multi-
View Stereo. In Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV), 501–
518.
Schops, T.; Schonberger, J. L.; Galliani, S.; Sattler, T.;
Schindler, K.; Pollefeys, M.; and Geiger, A. 2017. A Multi-
View Stereo Benchmark With High-Resolution Images and
Multi-Camera Videos. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR).
Shen, T.; Liu, S.; Feng, J.; Ma, Z.; and An, N. 2025.
Topology-Aware 3D Gaussian Splatting: Leveraging Persis-
tent Homology for Optimized Structural Integrity. In Pro-
ceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence,
volume 39, 6823–6832.
Shi, Y.; Xi, J.; Hu, D.; Cai, Z.; and Xu, K. 2023. RayMVS-
Net++: Learning Ray-Based 1D Implicit Fields for Accurate
Multi-View Stereo. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis
and Machine Intelligence.
Shvets, M.; Zhao, D.; Niethammer, M.; Sengupta, R.; and
Berg, A. C. 2024.
Joint Depth Prediction and Semantic
Segmentation with Multi-View Sam. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on Applications of Computer
Vision, 1328–1338.
Song, S.; Li, P.; Dun, M.; Huang, M.; Cao, H.; and Ye,
X. 2025a. GPromptShield: Elevating Resilience in Graph
Prompt Tuning Against Adversarial Attacks. In The Thir-
teenth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Song, S.; Li, P.; Dun, M.; Zhang, Y.; Cao, H.; and Ye, X.
2025b. Equipping Graph Autoencoders: Revisiting Masking
Strategies from a Robustness Perspective. In Proceedings of
the 2025 SIAM International Conference on Data Mining
(SDM), 366–375. SIAM.
Song, S.; Li, P.; Dun, M.; Zhang, Y.; Cao, H.; and Ye, X.
2025c.
SPMGAE: Self-purified Masked Graph Autoen-
coders Release Robust Expression Power. Neurocomputing,
611: 128631.
Song, S.; Li, P.; Dun, M.; Zhang, Y.; Cao, H.; and Ye,
X. 2025d. SPMGAE: Self-purified masked graph autoen-
coders release robust expression power. Neurocomputing,
611: 128631.
Song, Z.; Bi, H.; Zhang, R.; Mao, T.; and Wang, Z.
2023.
Xvtp3d: cross-view trajectory prediction using
shared 3d queries for autonomous driving. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.08764.
Song, Z.; Lin, X.; Huang, Q.; Wang, G.; and Lin, L.
2025e.
SIRI-Bench: Challenging VLMs’ Spatial Intelli-
gence through Complex Reasoning Tasks. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2506.14512.
Song, Z.; Qin, S.; Chen, T.; Lin, L.; and Wang, G.
2025f.
Physical autoregressive model for robotic ma-
nipulation without action pretraining.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2508.09822.
Su, W.; and Tao, W. 2023. Efficient Edge-Preserving Multi-
View Stereo Network for Depth Estimation.
In Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol-
ume 37, 2348–2356.
Sun, H.; Xu, L.; Jin, S.; Luo, P.; Qian, C.; and Liu,
W. 2024.
PROGRAM: PROtotype GRAph Model based
Pseudo-Label Learning for Test-Time Adaptation. In The
Twelfth International Conference on Learning Representa-
tions.
Sun, N.; Fang, H.; Lu, Y.; Zhao, C.; and Ling, H. 2025a.
END2: Robust Dual-Decoder Watermarking Framework
Against Non-Differentiable Distortions. In Proceedings of
the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, volume 39,
773–781.
Sun, N.; Yuan, L.; Fang, H.; Lu, Y.; Ling, H.; Xie, S.;
and Zhao, C. 2025b. Ultra-high Resolution Watermarking
Framework Resistant to Extreme Cropping and Scaling. In
The Thirty-ninth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems.
Sutton, C.; and McCallum, A. 2012.
An Introduction to
Conditional Random Fields. Foundations and Trends® in
Machine Learning, 4(4): 267–373.
Tang, D.; Cao, X.; Hou, X.; Jiang, Z.; Liu, J.; and Meng,
D. 2024. Crs-diff: Controllable remote sensing image gen-
eration with diffusion model. IEEE Transactions on Geo-
science and Remote Sensing.
Tang, D.; Cao, X.; Wu, X.; Li, J.; Yao, J.; Bai, X.; Jiang,
D.; Li, Y.; and Meng, D. 2025. AeroGen: Enhancing remote
sensing object detection with diffusion-driven data genera-
tion. In Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition Conference, 3614–3624.
Wang, F.; Galliani, S.; Vogel, C.; and Pollefeys, M. 2022a.
IterMVS: Iterative probability estimation for efficient multi-
view stereo. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), 8606–8615.
Wang, J.; Chen, Y.; Liu, X.; Liu, C.; Liu, D.; Gao, J.; and
Xiong, Z. 2025a. MaskTwins: Dual-form Complementary
Masking for Domain-Adaptive Image Segmentation. In In-
ternational Conference on Machine Learning (ICML).
Wang, J.; Lin, C.; Guan, C.; Nie, L.; He, J.; Li, H.; Liao,
K.; and Zhao, Y. 2025b.
Jasmine: Harnessing Diffusion
Prior for Self-supervised Depth Estimation. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.15905.
Wang, J.; Lin, C.; Nie, L.; Huang, S.; Zhao, Y.; Pan, X.;
and Ai, R. 2024a. WeatherDepth: Curriculum Contrastive
Learning for Self-Supervised Depth Estimation under Ad-
verse Weather Conditions. In 2024 IEEE International Con-
ference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 4976–4982.
IEEE.
Wang, J.; Lin, C.; Nie, L.; Liao, K.; Shao, S.; and Zhao,
Y. 2024b.
Digging into Contrastive Learning for Robust
Depth Estimation with Diffusion Models. In Proceedings
of the 32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia,
4129–4137. ACM.
Wang, J.; Lin, C.; Sun, L.; Liu, R.; Nie, L.; Li, M.; Liao,
K.; Chu, X.; and Zhao, Y. 2025c.
From Editor to Dense
Geometry Estimator. arXiv preprint arXiv:2509.04338.
Wang, N.; Chen, Y.; Xiao, L.; Xiao, W.; Li, B.; Chen, Z.; Ye,
C.; Xu, S.; Zhang, S.; Yan, Z.; et al. 2025d. Unifying Ap-
pearance Codes and Bilateral Grids for Driving Scene Gaus-
sian Splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2506.05280.

<!-- page 20 -->
Wang, X.; Zhu, Z.; Huang, G.; Qin, F.; Ye, Y.; He, Y.; Chi,
X.; and Wang, X. 2022b. MVSTER: Epipolar Transformer
for Efficient Multi-View Stereo. In European Conference on
Computer Vision, 573–591. Springer.
Wang, Y.; Zeng, Z.; Guan, T.; Yang, W.; Chen, Z.; Liu,
W.; Xu, L.; and Luo, Y. 2023. Adaptive Patch Deforma-
tion for Textureless-Resilient Multi-View Stereo. In Proc.
IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR),
1621–1630.
Wei, Z.; Zhu, Q.; Min, C.; Chen, Y.; and Wang, G. 2021.
Aa-Rmvsnet: Adaptive Aggregation Recurrent Multi-View
Stereo Network. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Interna-
tional Conference on Computer Vision, 6187–6196.
Wu, J.; Li, R.; Xu, H.; Zhao, W.; Zhu, Y.; Sun, J.; and Zhang,
Y. 2024. GoMVS: Geometrically Consistent Cost Aggrega-
tion for Multi-View Stereo. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
20207–20216.
Xing, S.; Li, P.; Wang, Y.; Bai, R.; Wang, Y.; Hu, C.-W.;
Qian, C.; Yao, H.; and Tu, Z. 2025. Re-Align: Aligning vi-
sion language models via retrieval-augmented direct pref-
erence optimization.
In Proceedings of the 2025 Confer-
ence on Empirical Methods in Natural Language Process-
ing, 2379–2397.
Xu, Q.; Kong, W.; Tao, W.; and Pollefeys, M. 2022. Multi-
Scale Geometric Consistency Guided and Planar Prior As-
sisted Multi-View Stereo.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence.
Xu, Q.; and Tao, W. 2019. Multi-Scale Geometric Consis-
tency Guided Multi-View Stereo. In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf.
Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR).
Xue, T.; Owens, A.; Scharstein, D.; Goesele, M.; and
Szeliski, R. 2019. Multi-Frame Stereo Matching with Edges,
Planes, and Superpixels. Image and Vision Computing, 91:
103771.
Yan, J.; Wei, Z.; Yi, H.; Ding, M.; Zhang, R.; Chen, Y.;
Wang, G.; and Tai, Y.-W. 2020. Dense Hybrid Recurrent
Multi-view Stereo Net with Dynamic Consistency Check-
ing. In Vedaldi, A.; Bischof, H.; Brox, T.; and Frahm, J.-M.,
eds., Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, volume 12349, 674–
689. Cham: Springer International Publishing. ISBN 978-3-
030-58547-1 978-3-030-58548-8.
Yan, R.; Lv, Z.; Yang, Z.; Lin, S.; Zheng, C.; and Zhang,
F. 2024a. Sparse and Hierarchical Transformer for Survival
Analysis on Whole Slide Images. IEEE Journal of Biomed-
ical and Health Informatics, 28(1): 7–18.
Yan, Z.; Dong, W.; Shao, Y.; Lu, Y.; Liu, H.; Liu, J.; Wang,
H.; Wang, Z.; Wang, Y.; Remondino, F.; et al. 2025. Render-
world: World model with self-supervised 3d label. In 2025
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), 6063–6070. IEEE.
Yan, Z.; Li, L.; Shao, Y.; Chen, S.; Wu, Z.; Hwang, J.-N.;
Zhao, H.; and Remondino, F. 2024b. 3dsceneeditor: Con-
trollable 3d scene editing with gaussian splatting.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.01583.
Yan, Z.; Mazzacca, G.; Rigon, S.; Farella, E. M.; Trybala,
P.; Remondino, F.; et al. 2023. NeRFBK: a holistic dataset
for benchmarking NeRF-based 3D reconstruction. Interna-
tional Archives of the Photogrammetry, Remote Sensing and
Spatial Information Sciences, 48(1): 219–226.
Yang, J.; Mao, W.; Alvarez, J. M.; and Liu, M. 2020. Cost
Volume Pyramid Based Depth Inference for Multi-View
Stereo.
In Proc. IEEE/CVF Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern
Recognit. (CVPR), 4876–4885.
Yang, Y.; Wang, Z.; Zhang, D.; Zhang, H.; Zhi, P.; Zhao, R.;
Kong, X.; Zhou, R.; and Zhou, Q. 2024a. A3Framework:
A Cloud Framework with Autonomous Driving Path Plan-
ning.
In 2024 Twelfth International Conference on Ad-
vanced Cloud and Big Data (CBD), 136–141.
Yang, Z.; Li, H.; Zang, D.; Han, R.; and Zhang, F. 2024b.
Improved Denoising of Cryo-Electron Microscopy Micro-
graphs with Simulation-Aware Pretraining. Journal of Com-
putational Biology, 31(6): 564–575.
Yang, Z.; Shi, X.; Ba, W.; Song, Z.; Luan, H.; Hu, T.; Lin,
S.; Wang, J.; Zhou, S. K.; and Yan, R. 2025.
Fusion of
Multi-scale Heterogeneous Pathology Foundation Models
for Whole Slide Image Analysis.
Yang, Z.; Zang, D.; Li, H.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, F.; and Han,
R. 2024c.
Self-Supervised Noise Modeling and Sparsity
Guided Electron Tomography Volumetric Image Denoising.
Ultramicroscopy, 255: 113860.
Yang, Z.; Zang, D.; Li, H.; Zhang, Z.; Zhang, F.; and Han, R.
2024d. Self-supervised noise modeling and sparsity guided
electron tomography volumetric image denoising. Ultrami-
croscopy, 255: 113860.
Yang, Z.; Zhang, F.; and Han, R. 2021.
Self-Supervised
Cryo-Electron Tomography Volumetric Image Restoration
From Single Noisy Volume With Sparsity Constraint.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), 4056–4065.
Yao, Y.; Luo, Z.; Li, S.; Fang, T.; and Quan, L. 2018. MVS-
Net: Depth Inference for Unstructured Multi-view Stereo. In
Proc. Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis. (ECCV).
Yao, Y.; Luo, Z.; Li, S.; Zhang, J.; Ren, Y.; Zhou, L.; Fang,
T.; and Quan, L. 2020. Blendedmvs: A Large-Scale Dataset
for Generalized Multi-View Stereo Networks. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 1790–1799.
Yuan, Z.; Cao, J.; Li, Z.; Jiang, H.; and Wang, Z. 2024a. SD-
MVS: Segmentation-driven Deformation Multi-View Stereo
with Spherical Refinement and EM Optimization. Proceed-
ings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 38(7):
6871–6880.
Yuan, Z.; Cao, J.; Wang, Z.; and Li, Z. 2024b.
Tsar-
Mvs: Textureless-aware Segmentation and Correlative Re-
finement Guided Multi-View Stereo. Pattern Recognition,
110565.
Yuan, Z.; Qu, X.; Qian, C.; Chen, R.; Tang, J.; Sun, L.; Chu,
X.; Zhang, D.; Wang, Y.; Cai, Y.; et al. 2025a. Video-star:
Reinforcing open-vocabulary action recognition with tools.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2510.08480.
Yuan, Z.; Tang, J.; Luo, J.; Chen, R.; Qian, C.; Sun, L.;
Chu, X.; Cai, Y.; Zhang, D.; and Li, S. 2025b. AutoDrive-
R2: Incentivizing Reasoning and Self-Reflection Capacity

<!-- page 21 -->
for VLA Model in Autonomous Driving.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.01944.
Yuan, Z.; Yang, Z.; Cai, Y.; Wu, K.; Liu, M.; Zhang,
D.; Jiang, H.; Li, Z.; and Wang, Z. 2025c.
SED-
MVS: Segmentation-Driven and Edge-Aligned Deformation
Multi-View Stereo with Depth Restoration and Occlusion
Constraint. IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for
Video Technology.
Zhang, D.; Chen, D.; Zhi, P.; Chen, Y.; Yuan, Z.; Li, C.;
Zhou, R.; Zhou, Q.; et al. 2025a. Mapexpert: Online hd map
construction with simple and efficient sparse map element
expert. In Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, volume 39, 14745–14753.
Zhang, D.; Sun, J.; Hu, C.; Wu, X.; Yuan, Z.; Zhou, R.;
Shen, F.; and Zhou, Q. 2025b. Pure Vision Language Action
(VLA) Models: A Comprehensive Survey. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2509.19012.
Zhang, D.; Yuan, Z.; Huang, K.; Yan, Y.; Li, C.; Nie, H.;
Zhao, S.; Zhou, R.; and Zhou, Q. 2025c. AT-Drive: Exploit-
ing Adversarial Transfer for End-to-end Autonomous Driv-
ing.
Zhang, D.; Yuan, Z.; Li, C.; Chen, Y.; Zhao, S.; Nie, H.;
Zhou, R.; and Zhou, Q. 2025d. ADDI: A Simplified E2E
Autonomous Driving Model with Distinct Experts and Im-
plicit Interactions.
Zhang, D.; Zhi, P.; Yong, B.; Wang, J.-Q.; Hou, Y.; Guo, L.;
Zhou, Q.; and Zhou, R. 2023a. EHSS: An Efficient Hybrid-
supervised Symmetric Stereo Matching Network.
2023
IEEE 26th International Conference on Intelligent Trans-
portation Systems (ITSC), 1044–1051.
Zhang, Y.; Zhu, J.; Lin, L.; and Lin, L. 2023b. Multi-View
Stereo Representation Revist: Region-Aware MVSNet. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, 17376–17385.
Zhang, Z.; Peng, R.; Hu, Y.; and Wang, R. 2023c. GeoMVS-
Net: Learning Multi-View Stereo With Geometry Percep-
tion. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition, 21508–21518.
Zhu, J.; Huang, H.; Li, B.; and Wang, L. 2023.
E-
CRF: Embedded Conditional Random Field for Boundary-
caused Class Weights Confusion in Semantic Segmentation.
arxiv:2112.07106.
