<!-- page 1 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget: A Continual
Learning Perspective of Dynamic SLAM
Baicheng Li1, Zike Yan2†, Dong Wu1, Hanqing Jiang3, and Hongbin Zha1†
1 National Key Lab of GAI, School of IST
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
Peking University
2 AIR, Tsinghua University
3 SenseTime Research
Abstract. Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) with im-
plicit neural representations has received extensive attention due to the
expressive representation power and the innovative paradigm of continual
learning. However, deploying such a system within a dynamic environ-
ment has not been well-studied. Such challenges are intractable even for
conventional algorithms since observations from different views with dy-
namic objects involved break the geometric and photometric consistency,
whereas the consistency lays the foundation for joint optimizing the cam-
era pose and the map parameters. In this paper, we best exploit the char-
acteristics of continual learning and propose a novel SLAM framework
for dynamic environments. While past efforts have been made to avoid
catastrophic forgetting by exploiting an experience replay strategy, we
view forgetting as a desirable characteristic. By adaptively controlling
the replayed buffer, the ambiguity caused by moving objects can be eas-
ily alleviated through forgetting. We restrain the replay of the dynamic
objects by introducing a continually-learned classifier for dynamic ob-
ject identification. The iterative optimization of the neural map and the
classifier notably improves the robustness of the SLAM system under
a dynamic environment. Experiments on challenging datasets verify the
effectiveness of the proposed framework.
1
Introduction
Simultaneous localization and mapping (SLAM) describes the instant agent state
and the environment where the agent operates. By constructing a consistent map
on the fly given sequential observations, the agent gradually gains knowledge of
the environment that can be utilized for downstream vision and robotics applica-
tions. The consistency in both temporal and spatial domains lays the foundation
of the problem since the genesis of SLAM [8], where the view-invariant photo-
metric and geometric cues within the map are leveraged to predict and validate
future measurements [3]. Nevertheless, this consistency cannot be guaranteed in
† Corresponding authors.
arXiv:2407.13338v1  [cs.CV]  18 Jul 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
2
B. Li et al.
Fig. 1: We introduce a continual learning based SLAM framework under challenging
dynamic environments (top row). The proposed method jointly learns a classifier to
alleviate the effects induced by the moving objects (middle row), and a neural map
to memorize past observations as a neural radiance field (bottom row). The iterative
optimization of pose, map, and classifier parameters forms a robust SLAM system that
learns to memorize and to forget adaptively in the changing open world.
the setting as various environmental changes may occur due to the object move-
ments. Alleviating the effects induced by the inconsistency between observations
and the map is of great importance for robust long-term deployment.
Intuitively, a robust SLAM system can be achieved if frame-to-model align-
ment is conducted based on pure static/invariant features [30]. Such a system
requires accurate identification of environmental changes in both observations
and the map. Conventional methods turn to remove the dynamic objects in
observations through motion segmentation, and update the discretized map by
heuristically deleting the corresponding areas. Recent advances [34, 45] show
that an implicit neural representation can also be updated in a purely static en-
vironment through test-time optimization to serve as the map of a dense SLAM
system. Besides the experience-replay based continual learning paradigm that
most methods adopt to avoid catastrophic forgetting of past observations, we
argue that the forgetting is also a nice property to update the neural map given
environmental changes. Only the retention of invariant features should be made
from the observations, whereas the changing part will be naturally forgotten
under constant distribution shifts.
In this work, we introduce a dense neural SLAM framework to tackle chal-
lenging dynamic scenarios. The key idea is the continual learning of two modules,
a neural map f(x; θt
M) that distills past observations into a continuous neural
radiance field, and a binary classifier g(z; θt
C) that records the motion status
(static/dynamic) of each instance given the encoded feature z. The continual
learning fashion guarantees online adaption to the instant state of scene geome-
try, appearance, and object motion status. Both modules accumulate knowledge
from sequential observations and automatically decide what to memorize and
what to forget. The inconsistent areas between the observation and the map

<!-- page 3 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
3
…
…
Keyframe 
Database
Is Keyframe?
Yes
Updating Keyframe Masks
Updating the Classifier
Tracking and BA
Render
Visual 
Encoder
Classifier
…
…
Implicit Neural Representation
FastSAM
Keyframe 
Replay
Fig. 2: Overview of the proposed method. We effectively integrated instance segmen-
tation module, visual encoder, and a continually-learned classifier to achieve accurate
dynamic object identification, enabling robust localization and mapping in complex
dynamic environments.
will be identified and not contribute to the pose estimation and map updating.
Such iterative optimization of poses, map parameters, and object motion status
leads to a robust framework for dynamic SLAM under changing environments.
To summarize, our main contributions include:
– We present for the first time the deployment of a dense neural SLAM frame-
work under challenging dynamic environments. The proposed method leads
to reliable motion segmentation, robust camera tracking, and convenient
map updating under diverse environmental changes.
– We propose a continual learning method for updating a classifier that records
the motion status of objects within the environment. The instance-aware
classifier applies to open-world scenarios and shows positive forward and
backward transfer. The module can also integrate prior knowledge regarding
potentially movable instances through pre-training.
– We show that the forgetting mechanism of continual learning can be ex-
ploited to update the neural scene representation under changing environ-
mental conditions.
2
Related Work
Visual SLAM in dynamic environments. This line of work removes dynamic
objects and reconstructs the static environment. A number of methods [6,25,32]
utilize warping or reprojection to identify the inconsistency in motion, appear-
ance, or geometry. Although motion segmentation can be generalized to different
environments, motion ambiguity leads to typical failures when a large portion
of a moving object occupies the image. There is also an attempt [14] that re-
lies on semantic segmentation [11] to pre-define dynamic categories. However,
the solution mainly relies on common sense and cannot adapt to the real open

<!-- page 4 -->
4
B. Li et al.
world. In addition, some approaches combine motion detection with semantic
cues. DynaSLAM [2] and DRG-SLAM [44] filter out features that fall into a
pre-defined category or avoid geometric constraints. They might over-segment
dynamic areas and leave insufficient information for localization. On the contrary,
SLAMANTIC [31] and CFP-SLAM [12] check the observations in the pre-defined
category through projection and only remove the features that present inconsis-
tency. Nonetheless, the temporal consistency of motion and its applicability to
the open world are commonly ignored. The relevant methods struggle to trade-off
between over-segmentation and under-segmentation. Additionally, there exists a
category of work dedicated to change detection [1, 26, 27, 37, 38, 42], which can
identify areas of change in the environment offline, given known camera poses
and a complete point cloud. However, in the context of SLAM, both the cam-
era poses and the complete environmental model are unknown, and the process
needs to be conducted online. We effectively fulfill this requirement through a
continually-learned classifier.
Dense SLAM with implicit neural representations. The compact and
continuous representation power of implicit neural representations [20] draws
public attention in the SLAM community. The seminal works of [34] and [45]
show that neural representation can be updated through test-time optimization.
The follow-ups try different neural representations for better efficiency or accu-
racy [7,13,16,21,23,29,46,49]. Recently, Co-SLAM [43] leverages both the high-
frequency preserving characteristics of coordinate-based representation and the
fast convergence of optimizable feature grids for an accurate and efficient dense
SLAM system. Though the above-mentioned methods make great progress in
reconstructing static scenes, they are prone to failure when deployed in dynamic
environments. We take a step further to address the problem by continually
learning what to memorize and what to forget.
NeRF construction in changing environments. Although there is no prior
work specified at tackling the NeRF-based SLAM deployment in dynamic en-
vironments, some research has been conducted to train a neural radiance field
under changing environments. NeRF in the wild [19] pioneers the use of appear-
ance embedding to handle environmental changes. The solution is frequently
adopted in follow-up works [35,36,41,48]. There are also works that target the
reconstruction of the spatial-temporal 4D field of the environment [9,10,18,40],
where per-point radiance and motion are integrated into the neural representa-
tion. Recently, CLNeRF [4] leverages continual learning to progressively update
the scene representation to adapt to changing environments. Similarly, Dyna-
MoN [15] applies motion segmentation to DROID-SLAM [39] to achieve accurate
camera pose estimation in dynamic environments. The estimated poses are then
utilized for offline optimization of a 4D NeRF. In contrast, our work directly
builds the neural radiance field on the fly in dynamic environments and targets
a much more challenging SLAM problem. The invariant information within the
environment is stored adaptively under different circumstances.

<!-- page 5 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
5
3
Preliminaries
The central idea of this work is a general framework to mitigate the discrepancy
between observations and the stored map under changing environments. The
framework is expected to distinguish among past observations what are the in-
variant features to memorize and what are the changing areas to forget. Through
this manner, only reliable features that meet the multi-view consistency over a
long period will be reserved, and only errors outside the dynamic areas will be
back-propagated to update the pose and map parameters. In practice, we resort
to a continual learning fashion, where a neural map and a motion status classifier
are trained on the fly that distill knowledge from sequential observations into
compact networks. The map will serve as a global memory of the scene radiance,
whereas the classifier will serve as a dynamic object detector. The iterative opti-
mization of both networks defines the memorization-forgetting loop for a robust
neural SLAM system.
Learn to memorize Following the recent progress of neural SLAM, we adopt
the experience-replay based continual learning for test-time map optimization,
where a set of keyframes are stored explicitly for back-propagating errors to
the network parameter optimization. The keyframes can be viewed as a com-
pressed knowledge of past experience. The map can then memorize the knowledge
through gradient-based optimization given the constantly replayed keyframe
buffer.
Learn to forget As neural networks exhibit high plasticity, past knowledge
can be easily forgotten during constant distribution shift [45]. We expect the
framework to adaptively forget the scene dynamics while preserving the invari-
ant information. Note that the past knowledge is controlled by the replayed
keyframes, we utilize a classifier to identify the areas within stored keyframes
that have been changed. The forgetting in the neural mapping naturally under-
goes if the dynamic areas on each keyframe are prohibited from replaying. The
classifier should be instance-wise and allow efficient adaptation once the envi-
ronmental changes occur. The updated motion status can then be passed to the
stored keyframes to enforce forgetting.
4
Method
Fig. 2 shows the overview of our dynamic SLAM framework. In practice, stream-
ing RGB-D images {It, Dt}N
t=1 with known camera intrinsic K are taken as in-
puts, and a neural radiance field f(x; θt
M) is updated continually to memorize
the static part of the environment. The key to our robust SLAM framework
in dynamic environments is a continually learned binary classifier g(z; θt
C). The
past knowledge to be forgotten will be determined through the classifier by iden-
tifying inconsistency induced by object movement. Note that the optimization
of camera pose ξt, neural map θt
M, and motion status classifier θt
C all rely on the
discrepancy between rendered and observed RGB-D images. As illustrated in
Fig. 3, the tight coupling of these three variables makes the optimization inher-
ently ambiguous: the divergence of any variables leads to a high discrepancy. In

<!-- page 6 -->
6
B. Li et al.
RGB image
Depth image
Rendered RGB (Ours)
Rendered depth (Ours)
Photometric error (Ours)
Geometric error (Ours)
Rendered RGB (Co-SLAM)
Rendered depth (Co-SLAM)
Photometric error (Co-SLAM)
Geometric error (Co-SLAM)
Fig. 3: The optimization divergence of either camera pose, neural map, or motion
status classifier will lead to high photometric and geometric errors.
this section, we begin by introducing the photometric and geometric constraints
through volume rendering, followed by how these constraints propagate gradients
for optimizing the camera pose, map, and classifier parameters iteratively. We
argue that this ambiguity can be alleviated with the neural representations of the
map and the classifier, where the continuous representations exhibit promising
generalization ability and enforce temporally consistent predictions.
4.1
Formulation
The objective is to guarantee a photorealistic and multi-view consistent map
representation by minimizing the photometric and geometric errors in static
areas between the rendered images and observed images as:
  L_ {
p
ho}
=
\frac {
1}{| H|}  \ s um _{ (u,  v)  \
in H} \left | I \left [u, v \right ]-\hat {I}(\xi , \theta _M) \left [u, v \right ]\right |, \label {eq:objective_pho} 
(1)
  L_ {
g
eo}
=
\frac {
1}{| H|}  \ s um _{ (u,  v)  \
in H} \left | D \left [u, v \right ]-\hat {D}(\xi , \theta _M) \left [u, v \right ]\right |, \label {eq:objective_geo} 
(2)
where H ⊂1(Rt) is the set of static samples given motion segmentation mask
Rt indicated by the classifier. ˆI(ξt, θt
M) and ˆD(ξt, θt
M) are predicted color and
depth images through volume rendering.
In this paper, we follow Co-SLAM [43] to model the scene as a truncated
signed distance field s with color values \protect \mathbf  {c} as f(x; θ) →(c, s). Nevertheless, the
proposed method can also adopt the conventional NeRF representation with
density-based volume rendering as [20]. In this work, the learnable map param-
eters θ = {α, ϕ, τ} denote the encoder V(x; α) for grid features and the decoders
for color and geometry. The volume rendering for color and depth prediction
is a weighted sum of all samples {pi}N
i=1 along a ray determined by the pixel
coordinate and the camera origin as:
  \ha t {I}( \x i
 
, 
\th et
a
 
_M)
[u,v] = \frac {1}{\sum _{i=1}^{N} w_i} \sum _{i=1}^{N} w_i \mathbf {c}_i, \label {eq:rendering_pho} 
(3)

<!-- page 7 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
7
  \ha t {D}( \x i
 
, 
\th et
a
 
_M)
[u,v] = \frac {1}{\sum _{i=1}^{N} w_i} \sum _{i=1}^{N} w_i d_i, \label {eq:rendering_geo} 
(4)
where wi is the computed weight; di is the distance between the sampled point pi
and the corresponding camera origin. It should be noted that in Co-SLAM [43],
the weight w is computed by multiplying two Sigmoid functions as:
  w
 =
 \s
i
g
m
a  
\le
f
t (\frac {s}{\lambda _{tr}}\right ) \sigma \left (-\frac {s}{\lambda _{tr}}\right ). \label {eq:weight} 
(5)
where \lambda _{tr} is the truncation distance.
4.2
Motion-aware Tracking and Mapping
Besides the photometric and geometric constraints in Eq. 1 and 2, we also adopt
the SDF losses Lsdf in near-surface and free space Lfree along with the feature
smoothness loss Lsmooth in Co-SLAM [43] for further constraints.
The SDF loss is employed to enhance the quality of map reconstruction,
where the depth values of pixels are utilized as SDF approximations. For points
within the truncated region (|D[u,  v ]  - \h at { D}[u, v]| \leq tr):
  L_ {
s
df} 
=
 \fr
a
c {1
} {
|
R_H|}
 
\
su m  _{r\ in  R_H} \frac {1}
{|S_r^{tr}|}\sum _{p \in S_r^{tr}} \big (s_p - (D[u, v] - \hat {D}(\xi , \theta _M)[u, v])\big )^2 
(6)
where  R_H represents the set of rays corresponding to the static pixel set  H .
For points outside of the truncation region (|D[u,  v ]  - \h at { D}[u, v]| > tr), we
calculate the free space loss:
  L_{ f
r
ee} 
=
 \fr
a
c { 1 }{|
R _
H
|} \sum 
_
{r\ i n R_H} \frac {1}{|S_r \setminus S_r^{tr}|}\sum _{p \in S_r \setminus S_r^{tr}} (s_p - tr)^2, 
(7)
To mitigate the noisy reconstruction of unvisited areas induced by hash col-
lision, a smoothness loss for the interpolated features is applied:
  L_{sm o o
th}
 
= \
fr
a c  {
1 } {|
\mathcal {G}|}\sum _{p \in \mathcal {G}} \Delta _x^2 + \Delta _y^2 + \Delta _z^2, 
(8)
where \De lta x, y, z = V_\alpha (p + \epsilon _{x, y, z}) - V_\alpha (p) z
refers to the change in feature metrics
between adjacent vertices sampled on the hash-grid.
We apply ADAM optimizer on the weighted sum of these five loss terms:
  \lab e l {eq: o verall _ loss} L  = L_{pho}+\lambda _1 L_{geo}+\lambda _2 L_{sdf}+\lambda _3 L_{free}+\lambda _4 L_{smooth}. 
(9)
Note that in the loss function, only errors in the static areas will be back-
propagated for optimizing the pose and map parameters, where the motion
segmentation mask Rt is inferred using the instance-wise classifier g(z; θt
C) in
Sec. 4.3. During the tracking process, we randomly select |Ht| pixels within the

<!-- page 8 -->
8
B. Li et al.
Fig. 4: The rendering results given the continually learned map indicate the gradual
forgetting of the dynamic object.
static area of the current frame and optimize the estimated camera pose by
minimizing the objective function with fixed map and classifier parameters.
Similarly, the bundle adjustment for jointly optimizing camera poses and
map parameters is carried out by randomly selecting |Hb| pixels within the static
area of the past keyframes and the current frame. Stored keyframes serve as past
experience to avoid catastrophic forgetting [34,45]. As the error of pixels in the
dynamic areas is inhibited from back-propagation, only knowledge in the static
areas will be reserved in the neural map. As illustrated in Fig. 4, the moving
object will be gradually forgotten in the neural map given constantly propagated
errors from recent observations.
4.3
Updating of Object Motion Status
As illustrated in Fig. 2, the motion status is inferred at the instance level. An
image It is decomposed into Kt segments {St
k}Kt
k=1 using FastSAM [47], where
each segment is then fed to a visual context encoder [17,22,28]. Such decomposi-
tion and encoding process turns the image into Kt vectors {zt
k}Kt
k=1 to represent
Kt different instances. Intuitively, we aim to maintain the motion status of each
instance across time. Explicitly aggregating information of each instance across
views is non-trivial as the dynamic objects lead to inconsistency. We turn to a
simple but effective solution that implicitly records the motion status of each
instance using a two-layer MLP as g(z; θt
C). The network serves as a classifier
that determines the motion status of the corresponding instance feature, where
an instance will be treated as a moving object if g(zt
k; θt
C) > 0.5.
The object movement leads to inconsistency between the observation and
the stored knowledge. As emitted radiance is view-dependent [20], we merely
examine the geometry inconsistency between the rendered depth map and the
observed one. The moving status ot
k of the instance k will be treated as True if
a certain portion of pixels within the segment St
k exhibit large discrepancies as:
 
 \label 
{ e
q
:dyna mic_cr it e ria}  \ f ra
c
 {\
su
m  _{(u, v) \in S_k^t} \mathbbm {1}\left (\hat {D}(\xi , \theta _M)[u,v] - D[u,v] > t_d\right )}{|S_k^t|} > t_p, 
(10)

<!-- page 9 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
9
RGB Image
 g(z;θC)
 g(z,p;θC)
Fig. 5: Concatenating the position feature with the semantic embedding allows the
classifier to only forget the knowledge regarding the box in the previous position. After
being replaced, the box radiance at the latest position will be memorized after a few
time intervals.
where td and tp controls the sensitivity of motion segmentation.
The classifier will be updated if the current moving status of any instance
ot
k contradicts the classification result 1(g(zt
k; θt−1
C
) > 0.5). The network is opti-
mized using the binary cross-entropy loss as:
 
 \
l
abe
l
 {
e q:maskne
t_ up
dat i ng }  -
\s um _{ k =1}^
{K ^t
} \
b
ig [o_k^t\log (g(\mathbf {z}^{t}_k;\theta _C^*))+(1-o_k^t)\log (1-g(\mathbf {z}^{t}_k;\theta _C^*))\big ]. 
(11)
Once the classifier is updated, the motion segmentation mask of all keyframes
will be updated. The observations regarding the moving object will no longer
contribute to the pose and map optimization. As the neural map is continually
trained under constant distribution shift, the knowledge regarding the moving
object will be gradually forgotten without manual operations.
Continual learning of the classifier. Catastrophic forgetting is not only an
issue that neural SLAM system need to address, it also has a negative impact
on the classifier. If we train the classifier using only the objects that appear in
the current frame, catastrophic forgetting could occur, causing the classifier to
forget previously learned dynamic objects. Therefore, we also maintain a replay
buffer for the classifier to avoid this issue. For all instances in the current frame,
if an instance is marked as dynamic after passing through a check for geometric
inconsistency, it will be added to this replay buffer. When updating the classifier,
training is conducted not only with instances from the current frame but also
by randomly selecting  n_c instances from the replay buffer as training data.  n_c is
typically set to 5 in our experiments.
Bidirectional check. Eq. 10 identifies a moving object if it is observed in front
of the rendered place. However, if an object is removed from the scene or if the

<!-- page 10 -->
10
B. Li et al.
RGB Image
Inconsistency
Motion seg.
Fig. 6: The continual learning of the classifier on the fr3_walking_static sequence of
TUM RGB-D dataset. A segment is treated as a dynamic part if a certain portion
within the segment exhibits high discrepancy.
object moves away from the camera since the first frame, the observation may
fall behind the rendered one. Therefore, we apply a bidirectional check. Similar
to Eq. 10, we decompose the rendered image ˆD(ξ, θM) into ˆKt segments { ˆSt
k} ˆ
Kt
k=1
and apply the consistency check as:
 
 \labe l {
e q
:
dyna mi c _crit eria_i nv e rs
e
}  \f
ra
c  {\sum _{(u, v) \in \hat {S}_k^t} \mathbbm {1}\left (D[u,v] - \hat {D}(\xi , \theta _M)[u,v] > t_d\right )}{|\hat {S}_k^t|} > t_p. 
(12)
Incorporation of prior knowledge. One promising characteristic of the open-
set classifier is that we can apply prior knowledge through pre-training to pre-
define the instance motion status while allowing adaptation to the current state.
Specifically, we can train a classifier θpre
C
on specific categories, e.g., human, car,
animal. The object motion status can then be identified as "dynamic" if either
the pre-trained one or the online-learned one agrees.
Maintaining the instant object state. In the above-mentioned setting, we
would label any object that has been moved as "dynamic" even if it is replaced
in a new area and remains static afterward. It is due to the fact that the classi-
fier merely establishes the mapping between the instance feature and the corre-
sponding motion state. Thanks to the flexible structure of the classifier, we can
concatenate an additional position feature along with the semantic embedding
as the inputs. The classifier turns to record the motion state of an object at
a specific position (object center pt
k for instance) as g(zt
k, pt
k; θt
C). As we show
in the experiment, this simple strategy leads to a neural map that forgets the
removed object and memorizes the object at the new position gradually.
5
Experiments
We evaluate the proposed method on multiple sequences of TUM RGB-D dataset [33]
and Bonn RGB-D dataset [24]. The quality of estimated poses, neural map, and

<!-- page 11 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
11
Table 1: Comparisons of ATE (RMS) against traditional SLAM algorithms designed
for deployment in dynamic environments.
Sequence
ReFusion [25]
StaticFusion [32]
DynaSLAM [2]
Co-SLAM [43]
Ours
Bonn
balloon
0.175
0.233
0.050
0.308
0.206
balloon2
0.254
0.293
0.142
0.290
0.136
kidnapping_box
0.148
0.336
0.026
0.095
0.112
kidnapping_box2
0.161
0.263
0.033
0.118
0.104
crowd
0.204
3.586
1.065
fail
0.116
crowd2
0.155
0.215
1.217
fail
0.200
crowd3
0.137
0.168
0.835
fail
0.107
person_tracking
0.289
0.484
0.714
fail
0.274
synchronous
0.441
0.446
0.977
0.634
0.130
TUM
fr3_walking_static
0.017
0.015
0.014
fail
0.025
fr3_walking_xyz
0.099
0.093
0.085
fail
0.076
fr3_walking_halfsphere
0.104
0.681
0.084
fail
0.079
fr3_sitting_static
0.009
0.014
0.009
0.011
0.007
fr3_sitting_xyz
0.040
0.039
0.009
0.020
0.018
fr3_sitting_halfsphere
0.110
0.041
0.017
0.042
0.039
motion status reasoning are analyzed qualitatively and quantitatively. As the
first NeRF-SLAM-based method that tackles challenging dynamic environments,
we compare the proposed method against traditional methods of ReFusion [25],
StaticFusion [32], and DynaSLAM [2] that are designed specifically to dynamic
environments. We also compare against our codebase of Co-SLAM [43] to see
how the proposed strategies guarantee robust camera tracking with promising
reconstruction quality.
5.1
Experimental Setup
The experiments are conducted on a desktop PC with an Intel i9-12900K CPU,
an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU, and 64GB memory. The keyframe is automatically
stored every 5 frames.
Specific to implementation details, the number of sampling points along each
ray N = 128, sampling pixels during tracking and bundle adjustment H_ t
=1024 , H _b=2048, truncation distance tr = 10cm, threshold used for determining
moving status t_ d =0.3 , t _p=0.05. For the weights of each loss in Eq. 9, we follow
the settings of Co-SLAM as: \l a mbda  _ 1 =0.1,  \ l amb da  _2 = 5000, \lambda _3=10, \lambda _4=1e-8.
5.2
Tracking and Mapping
As illustrated in Fig. 3, the photometric and geometric errors in dynamic areas
lead to inherent ambiguities as they will be back-propagated to modify the pose
estimates and mapping results. As tracking and mapping are coupled during
the optimization, the erroneous tracking and the fusion of dynamic objects into
the map would eventually lead to system collapse. The proposed method, on

<!-- page 12 -->
12
B. Li et al.
Classifier w/o replay
Classifier with replay
Novel view
synthesis
Motion seg. of
frame 190
Motion seg. of
frame 190 
Novel view
synthesis
Observation
over time
Frame 190
Frame 350
Fig. 7: The comparison regarding whether the classifier undergoes continual learning.
The 2nd and 4th rows illustrate the classifier’s determination results for dynamic in-
stances in frame 190 at different times. The 3rd and 5th rows display the rendering
results to demonstrate changes in the map.
the other hand, achieves robust camera tracking results even in the challenging
’crowd’ sequences. As presented in Tab. 1, the proposed method achieves better
results compared against the feature-based DynaSLAM [2] and the dense SLAM
systems of ReFusion [25] and StaticFusion [32]. The effects arising from the
dynamic objects are well alleviated by the proposed motion status classifier.
The forgetting and memorization. The forgetting mechanism is demon-
strated in Fig. 4. Once the classifier identifies the man as a moving object, the
knowledge will no longer act on the map parameters. Meanwhile, the areas oc-
cluded by the man will appear once the man goes away, and the inconsistency
between the rendered image and the observation in other views will contribute
to the map updating. As demonstrated in Sec. 4.3, one interesting fact is that
we can also maintain the updated object status through a simple coordinate
concatenation. As illustrated in Fig. 5, the box will be forgotten after being
kidnapped, and reappear on the map after being placed.
5.3
Motion Segmentation
As illustrated in Fig. 6, the continual learning of the classifier leads to dynamic
updating of the object motion status. The successive changes in motion status
can be well reflected by the geometric inconsistency, and the classifier can quickly

<!-- page 13 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
13
BLIP
CLIP
DINOv2
RGB image
0.0
1.0
0.5
1.0
Classifier output
Cosine similarity
Classifier output (BLIP)
Classifier output (CLIP)
Classifier output (DINOv2)
Cosine similarity (BLIP)
Cosine similarity (CLIP)
Cosine similarity (DINOv2)
Fig. 8: The different choices of visual encoder lead to diverse behaviors for predicting
object motion status in incoming frames.
identify the motion changes and learn the instant motion status. The encoded
feature of masked objects can well distinguish between two people even if they
fall into the same "person" category.
Continual learning of the classifier. As mentioned in Sec. 4.3, the classifier
could also encounter catastrophic forgetting. Therefore, we implement contin-
ual learning for the classifier by maintaining a replay buffer. As demonstrated in
Fig. 7, we select a specific frame (frame 190) for observation. It is evident that the
classifier with replay maintains its ability for accurate motion segmentation on
the earlier frame over time. In contrast, the classifier without continual learning
is likely to perform poorly on the previous training data after updates, segment-
ing the dynamic instances incorrectly. Specifically, the person in red gradually
walks out of the frame (see the second column of Fig. 7). Meanwhile, the clas-
sifier undergoes an update. Without replay, training solely on instances from
the current frame, the classifier forgets that the person in red is also dynamic.
This oversight leads to the person erroneously appearing in the map, further
affecting subsequent calculations of geometric inconsistency. This experiment
strongly proves that the continual learning strategy designed for the classifier is
both effective and necessary.
The choices of visual encoders. To further understand how the motion seg-
mentation behavior is affected by encoded features, we look into the motion
prediction given a fixed classifier. As illustrated in Fig. 8, after training the
classifier given supervisory signal from the frame I40, we freeze the network
θ40
C and predict the motion status of the human with the following observations
I40, · · · , I280 every 30 frames as g(z40:280
k
; θ40
C ). We compare three different visual
encoders (BLIP [17], CLIP [28], and DinoV2 [22]) and visualize the predicted
motion state and the encoded feature similarity compared to the frame I40. Ap-

<!-- page 14 -->
14
B. Li et al.
RGB Image
Motion seg.
Motion seg.
Rendered Image
Rendered Image
Vanilla classifier
Classifier with priors
Mesh results
Fig. 9: The incorporation of prior knowledge leads to more robust camera tracking
under high dynamic environments.
parently, the powerful semantic information of language-aligned visual context
presents promising temporal consistency even if the object poses change drasti-
cally. The consistent feature embedding across views makes the implicit classifier
instance-aware and easy to adapt. We argue that the promising prediction ca-
pability leads to robust camera tracking under complex scene dynamics.
Incorporating pre-defined prior knowledge. As demonstrated in Sec. 4.3,
the proposed framework allows convenient incorporation of prior knowledge by
pre-training a classifier on specific categories. An exemplary case is illustrated in
Fig. 9. Here we experiment using a segment after frame 410 from the freiburg3
walking static sequence, where individuals occupy a significant portion of the
frame from the outset. By pre-defining humans as dynamic objects and pre-
training a classifier using a human matting dataset [5], the ambiguity induced
by human motion can be alleviated at the very beginning. On the contrary, the
classifier without prior knowledge will have trouble figuring out the actual factor
that leads to inconsistency in such a challenging case. As illustrated in the figure,
the accurate static map can be reconstructed even though the moving objects
occupy nearly half of the frame when the stream begins.
6
Conclusion
In this paper, we address the dynamic SLAM problem with a neural map repre-
sentation. By learning an instance-aware classifier online that implicitly records
the per-object motion status, the invariant information within the observations
can be continually distilled to the neural map, where the interference induced by
dynamic objects is best alleviated. The iterative optimization of camera pose,
map, and classifier parameters forms a robust SLAM framework in challenging
dynamic environments.

<!-- page 15 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
15
Acknowledgement
We gratefully acknowledge the anonymous reviewers and AC for their valu-
able comments and suggestions. This work is supported by NSFC (U22A2061,
62176010) and 230601GP0004.
References
1. Adam, A., Sattler, T., Karantzalos, K., Pajdla, T.: Objects can move: 3d change
detection by geometric transformation consistency. In: European Conference on
Computer Vision. pp. 108–124. Springer (2022)
2. Bescos, B., Fácil, J.M., Civera, J., Neira, J.: Dynaslam: Tracking, mapping, and
inpainting in dynamic scenes. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters 3(4), 4076–
4083 (2018)
3. Cadena, C., Carlone, L., Carrillo, H., Latif, Y., Scaramuzza, D., Neira, J., Reid, I.,
Leonard, J.J.: Past, present, and future of simultaneous localization and mapping:
Toward the robust-perception age. IEEE Trans. Robotics 32(6), 1309–1332 (2016)
4. Cai, Z., Müller, M.: Clnerf: Continual learning meets nerf. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 23185–23194 (2023)
5. Chen, Q., Ge, T., Xu, Y., Zhang, Z., Yang, X., Gai, K.: Semantic human matting.
In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM international conference on Multimedia (2018)
6. Cheng, J., Sun, Y., Meng, M.Q.H.: Improving monocular visual slam in dynamic
environments: An optical-flow-based approach. Advanced Robotics 33(12), 576–
589 (2019)
7. Chung, C.M., Tseng, Y.C., Hsu, Y.C., Shi, X.Q., Hua, Y.H., Yeh, J.F., Chen, W.C.,
Chen, Y.T., Hsu, W.H.: Orbeez-slam: A real-time monocular visual slam with orb
features and nerf-realized mapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.13274 (2022)
8. Durrant-Whyte, H., Bailey, T.: Simultaneous localization and mapping: part i.
IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine 13(2), 99–110 (2006)
9. Fang, J., Yi, T., Wang, X., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Liu, W., Nießner, M., Tian, Q.:
Fast dynamic radiance fields with time-aware neural voxels. In: SIGGRAPH Asia
2022 Conference Papers. pp. 1–9 (2022)
10. Gao, C., Saraf, A., Kopf, J., Huang, J.B.: Dynamic view synthesis from dynamic
monocular video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (2021)
11. He, K., Gkioxari, G., Dollár, P., Girshick, R.: Mask r-cnn. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE international conference on computer vision. pp. 2961–2969 (2017)
12. Hu, X., Zhang, Y., Cao, Z., Ma, R., Wu, Y., Deng, Z., Sun, W.: Cfp-slam: A
real-time visual slam based on coarse-to-fine probability in dynamic environments.
In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS). pp. 4399–4406. IEEE (2022)
13. Johari, M.M., Carta, C., Fleuret, F.: Eslam: Efficient dense slam system based on
hybrid representation of signed distance fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2211.11704
(2022)
14. Kaneko, M., Iwami, K., Ogawa, T., Yamasaki, T., Aizawa, K.: Mask-slam: Ro-
bust feature-based monocular slam by masking using semantic segmentation. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
workshops. pp. 258–266 (2018)

<!-- page 16 -->
16
B. Li et al.
15. Karaoglu, M.A., Schieber, H., Schischka, N., Görgülü, M., Grötzner, F., Ladikos,
A., Roth, D., Navab, N., Busam, B.: Dynamon: Motion-aware fast and robust
camera localization for dynamic nerf. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.08927 (2023)
16. Kruzhkov, E., Savinykh, A., Karpyshev, P., Kurenkov, M., Yudin, E., Potapov, A.,
Tsetserukou, D.: Meslam: Memory efficient slam based on neural fields. In: 2022
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and Cybernetics (SMC) (2022)
17. Li, J., Li, D., Savarese, S., Hoi, S.: Blip-2: Bootstrapping language-image pre-
training with frozen image encoders and large language models. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2301.12597 (2023)
18. Li, Z., Niklaus, S., Snavely, N., Wang, O.: Neural scene flow fields for space-time
view synthesis of dynamic scenes. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 6498–6508 (2021)
19. Martin-Brualla, R., Radwan, N., Sajjadi, M.S., Barron, J.T., Dosovitskiy, A., Duck-
worth, D.: Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields for unconstrained photo col-
lections. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (2021)
20. Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M., Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng,
R.: Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. In: Pro-
ceedings of the European Conference on Computer Vision (2020)
21. Ming, Y., Ye, W., Calway, A.: idf-slam: End-to-end rgb-d slam with neural implicit
mapping and deep feature tracking. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.07919 (2022)
22. Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V.,
Fernandez, P., Haziza, D., Massa, F., El-Nouby, A., et al.: Dinov2: Learning robust
visual features without supervision. arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.07193 (2023)
23. Ortiz, J., Clegg, A., Dong, J., Sucar, E., Novotny, D., Zollhoefer, M., Mukadam, M.:
isdf: Real-time neural signed distance fields for robot perception. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.02296 (2022)
24. Palazzolo, E., Behley, J., Lottes, P., Giguère, P., Stachniss, C.: ReFusion: 3D Re-
construction in Dynamic Environments for RGB-D Cameras Exploiting Residuals.
In: IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS) (2019)
25. Palazzolo, E., Behley, J., Lottes, P., Giguere, P., Stachniss, C.: Refusion: 3d recon-
struction in dynamic environments for rgb-d cameras exploiting residuals. In: 2019
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
pp. 7855–7862. IEEE (2019)
26. Palazzolo, E., Stachniss, C.: Change detection in 3d models based on camera im-
ages. In: 9th Workshop on Planning, Perception and Navigation for Intelligent
Vehicles at the IEEE/RSJ Int. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS)
(2017)
27. Palazzolo, E., Stachniss, C.: Fast image-based geometric change detection given a
3d model. In: 2018 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). pp. 6308–6315. IEEE (2018)
28. Radford, A., Kim, J.W., Hallacy, C., Ramesh, A., Goh, G., Agarwal, S., Sastry, G.,
Askell, A., Mishkin, P., Clark, J., et al.: Learning transferable visual models from
natural language supervision. In: International conference on machine learning. pp.
8748–8763. PMLR (2021)
29. Sandström, E., Li, Y., Van Gool, L., Oswald, M.R.: Point-slam: Dense neural point
cloud-based slam. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision. pp. 18433–18444 (2023)
30. Saputra, M.R.U., Markham, A., Trigoni, N.: Visual slam and structure from motion
in dynamic environments: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys (CSUR) 51(2), 1–36
(2018)

<!-- page 17 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
17
31. Schorghuber, M., Steininger, D., Cabon, Y., Humenberger, M., Gelautz, M.:
Slamantic-leveraging semantics to improve vslam in dynamic environments. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
Workshops. pp. 0–0 (2019)
32. Scona, R., Jaimez, M., Petillot, Y.R., Fallon, M., Cremers, D.: Staticfusion: Back-
ground reconstruction for dense rgb-d slam in dynamic environments. In: 2018
IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA). pp. 3849–3856.
IEEE (2018)
33. Sturm, J., Engelhard, N., Endres, F., Burgard, W., Cremers, D.: A benchmark for
the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems. In: Proc. of the International Conference on
Intelligent Robot Systems (IROS) (2012)
34. Sucar, E., Liu, S., Ortiz, J., Davison, A.J.: imap: Implicit mapping and position-
ing in real-time. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (2021)
35. Suzuki, T.: Federated learning for large-scale scene modeling with neural radiance
fields. arXiv preprint arXiv:2309.06030 (2023)
36. Tancik, M., Casser, V., Yan, X., Pradhan, S., Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Bar-
ron, J.T., Kretzschmar, H.: Block-nerf: Scalable large scene neural view synthesis.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition. pp. 8248–8258 (2022)
37. Taneja, A., Ballan, L., Pollefeys, M.: Image based detection of geometric changes
in urban environments. In: 2011 international conference on computer vision. pp.
2336–2343. IEEE (2011)
38. Taneja, A., Ballan, L., Pollefeys, M.: City-scale change detection in cadastral 3d
models using images. In: Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition. pp. 113–120 (2013)
39. Teed, Z., Deng, J.: Droid-slam: Deep visual slam for monocular, stereo, and rgb-
d cameras. Advances in neural information processing systems 34, 16558–16569
(2021)
40. Tretschk, E., Tewari, A., Golyanik, V., Zollhöfer, M., Lassner, C., Theobalt, C.:
Non-rigid neural radiance fields: Reconstruction and novel view synthesis of a dy-
namic scene from monocular video. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 12959–12970 (2021)
41. Turki, H., Ramanan, D., Satyanarayanan, M.: Mega-nerf: Scalable construction of
large-scale nerfs for virtual fly-throughs. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 12922–12931 (2022)
42. Ulusoy, A.O., Mundy, J.L.: Image-based 4-d reconstruction using 3-d change de-
tection. In: Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference, Zurich,
Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part III 13. pp. 31–45. Springer
(2014)
43. Wang, H., Wang, J., Agapito, L.: Co-slam: Joint coordinate and sparse parametric
encodings for neural real-time slam. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 13293–13302 (2023)
44. Wang, Y., Xu, K., Tian, Y., Ding, X.: Drg-slam: A semantic rgb-d slam using
geometric features for indoor dynamic scene. In: 2022 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). pp. 1352–1359. IEEE (2022)
45. Yan, Z., Tian, Y., Shi, X., Guo, P., Wang, P., Zha, H.: Continual neural map-
ping: Learning an implicit scene representation from sequential observations. In:
IEEE/CVF Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR). pp.
15782–15792 (2021)

<!-- page 18 -->
18
B. Li et al.
46. Yang, X., Li, H., Zhai, H., Ming, Y., Liu, Y., Zhang, G.: Vox-fusion: Dense track-
ing and mapping with voxel-based neural implicit representation. In: 2022 IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality (ISMAR) (2022)
47. Zhao, X., Ding, W., An, Y., Du, Y., Yu, T., Li, M., Tang, M., Wang, J.: Fast
segment anything. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.12156 (2023)
48. Zhenxing, M., Xu, D.: Switch-nerf: Learning scene decomposition with mixture
of experts for large-scale neural radiance fields. In: The Eleventh International
Conference on Learning Representations (2022)
49. Zhu, Z., Peng, S., Larsson, V., Xu, W., Bao, H., Cui, Z., Oswald, M.R., Pollefeys,
M.: Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (2022)

<!-- page 19 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget: A Continual
Learning Perspective of Dynamic SLAM
Supplementary Material
Baicheng Li1, Zike Yan2†, Dong Wu1, Hanqing Jiang3, and Hongbin Zha1†
1 National Key Lab of GAI, School of IST
PKU-SenseTime Machine Vision Joint Lab
Peking University
2 AIR, Tsinghua University
3 SenseTime Research
1
Supplementary Results
1.1
Segmentation Pruning
Segmentation with FastSAM [47] leads to varying granularities. A person may
be separated into different parts as arms, legs, body, and head. In such a case,
we wish to retain the instance-level segmentation instead of the part-level de-
composition, thereby reducing the number of classifier updates.
Specifically, as illustrated in Fig. 1, for any two segments  R_1 and  R_2 , we
consider  R_1 to be a part of  R_2 and delete it if the portion of overlapped areas
between  R_1 and  R_2 is larger than  T_R as:
  S_{R _ 1 \ cap R_ 2} > T_R \times S_{R_1} 
(1)
where  T_R is set to 0.9 in our experiments.
1.2
Mesh Evaluation
We follow the dense dynamic SLAM system of ReFusion [25] to evaluate the mesh
results quantitatively. As shown in Fig. 2 and 3, our method achieves comparable
results with ReFusion [25] and outperforms StaticFusion [32]. Note that NeRF-
based methods mainly focus on realistic rendering (as presented in our main
paper and supp. video) instead of surface reconstruction, the quantitative results
sufficiently verify our map quality in dynamic environments.
1.3
Ablation Study on the Replay Training of the Classifier
We compare the number of updates for the classifier based on whether replay
training is performed. The experiment is conducted with different image en-
coders across two high-dynamic sequences: ’person_tracking’ and ’balloon’. The
results are illustrated in Fig. 4. It is clearly observable that the classifier un-
dergoing replay training requires fewer updates compared to the one without
replay, regardless of the image encoder used. Detailed analysis can be found in
the "continual learning of the classifier" parts of Sec. 4.3 and Sec. 5.3.

<!-- page 20 -->
2
B. Li et al.
RGB Image
Original Masks
Selected Masks
Fig. 1: The mask selection strategy helps to reduce a significant number of unnecessary
masks, thereby lessening interference to the system.
Fig. 2: Additional comparison results of mapping and tracking.
1.4
Run-time
We also tested the average run-time of each component of the system in the
two sequences mentioned above. In high-dynamic environments, we effectively
balanced the system’s speed and accuracy. Our method can run at a frame
rate of around 1 fps. In contrast, the frame rates of Co-SLAM [43], iMap [34],
and NICE-SLAM [49] are approximately 3 fps, 2 fps, and less than 0.1 fps,
respectively.
Table 1: Average run-time of Bonn dataset.
Instance feature ex-
traction
Tracking
Bundle adjustment
Classifier updating
231ms
149ms
161ms
397ms

<!-- page 21 -->
Learn to Memorize and to Forget
3
Fig. 3: Additional comparison results of mapping and tracking.
0
100
200
300
400
500
600
Frame
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
Number of classifier updates
BLIP-2
CLIP
DINOv2
classifier with replay
classifier w/o replay
0
100
200
300
400
Frame
0
2
4
6
8
10
Number of classifier updates
BLIP-2
CLIP
DINOv2
classifier with replay
classifier w/o replay
Fig. 4: Classifier update times: with and without replay training.
1.5
Visualization of Tracking Results
In Table 1 of the main paper, we present the quantitative results of camera
tracking, showing that our method achieves higher accuracy compared to other
dynamic SLAM approaches. Here, we also provide a qualitative demonstration
of these results. Fig. 5 shows a comparison of our trajectories with the ground
truth on three sequences.
1.6
Ablation Study on the Visual Encoders and Prior Knowledge
We tested the impact of different experimental settings on the accuracy of cam-
era tracking. Table 2 and Table 3 present the ablation study results on Bonn
RGB-D dataset. As shown in Table 2, using different visual encoders causes
slight variations in the tracking results, with BLIP-2 [17] performing the best
and DINOv2 [22] performing the worst. Table 3 reflects that the presence of
prior knowledge has minimal impact on tracking accuracy. In most cases, our

<!-- page 22 -->
4
B. Li et al.
Fig. 5: Trajectory plots of three sequences in Bonn RGB-D dataset.
Table 2: ATE (RMS) with different visual
encoders.
Sequence
BLIP-2 CLIP DINOv2
balloon
0.206
0.211
0.228
synchronous
0.130
0.139
0.146
person_tracking 0.274
0.271
0.278
Table 3: ATE (RMS) with and without
prior knowledge.
Sequence
w/o prior with prior
balloon
0.206
0.212
synchronous
0.130
0.134
person_tracking
0.274
0.259
method achieves precise camera tracking without prior knowledge. Only in han-
dling extremely challenging scenarios (such as Fig. 9 in the main paper), do we
need to incorporate prior knowledge.
2
The Forgetting Issue of Implicit Neural Representations
The global representation of iMap [34] results in severe catastrophic forgetting if
keyframe-based replay is not deployed, as the distribution shift constantly occurs
during the sequential data capturing. On the other hand, subsequent NeRF-
based SLAMs like Co-SLAM [43] and Point-SLAM [29] introduce the local neural
representations. They store local features of the scene on grids or points, which to
some extent alleviates this negative impact. However, they also employ a global
decoder to interpret local features, leading to catastrophic forgetting of the global
decoder if keyframe replay is not performed, thereby affecting the operation of
the entire system. Therefore, the keyframe buffer lays the foundation of the
neural SLAM systems for distilling all past knowledge jointly. We control the
replayed buffer through a continually learned classifier so effects from dynamic
objects over the past observations can be instantly eliminated, thereby leading to
the forgetting of these dynamic objects and maintaining an invariant map to be
updated. The methodology is applicable not only to global neural representations
but also to representations with discretely-stored local features.
