<!-- page 1 -->
Visual SLAM with 3D Gaussian Primitives and
Depth Priors Enabling Novel View Synthesis
1st Zhongche Qu∗
Computer Science
Columbia University
New York, USA
zq2172@columbia.edu
2nd Zhi Zhang
Computer Science
New York University
New York, USA
zz2310@nyu.edu
3rd Cong Liu
Computer Science
Peng Cheng Laboratory
Shenzhen, China
liuc@pcl.ac.cn
4th Jianhua Yin
Computer Science
Peng Cheng Laborbatory
Shenzhen, China
yinjhhust@163.com
Abstract—Conventional geometry-based SLAM systems lack
dense 3D reconstruction capabilities since their data association
usually relies on feature correspondences. Additionally, learning-
based SLAM systems often fall short in terms of real-time
performance and accuracy. Balancing real-time performance with
dense 3D reconstruction capabilities is a challenging problem. In
this paper, we present a real-time RGB-D SLAM system that uses
3D Gaussian Splatting for both 3D scene representation and pose
estimation. This method enables efficient real-time rendering and
differentiable optimization through CUDA, offering an edge over
NeRF. We also enable mesh reconstruction from 3D Gaussians
for explicit dense 3D reconstruction. To estimate accurate camera
poses, we utilize a rotation-translation decoupled strategy with
inverse optimization. This involves iteratively updating both in
several iterations through gradient-based optimization. This pro-
cess includes differentiably rendering RGB, depth, and silhouette
maps and updating the camera parameters to minimize a com-
bined loss of photometric loss, depth geometry loss, and visibility
loss, given the existing 3D Gaussian map. However, 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) struggles to accurately represent surfaces due
to the multi-view inconsistency of 3D Gaussians, which can
lead to reduced accuracy in both camera pose estimation and
scene reconstruction. To address this, we utilize depth priors
as additional regularization to enforce geometric constraints,
thereby improving the accuracy of both pose estimation and 3D
reconstruction. We also provide extensive experimental results
on public benchmark datasets to demonstrate the effectiveness
of our proposed methods in terms of pose accuracy, geometric
accuracy, and rendering performance.
Index Terms—Visual SLAM, 3D Gaussian Splatting, 3D Re-
construction, Novel View Synthesis.
I. INTRODUCTION
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a tech-
nique for estimating sensor motion and reconstructing the
structure of an unknown environment. When SLAM uses
cameras, it is specifically referred to as visual SLAM (vS-
LAM) because it relies solely on visual information. Visual
SLAM can be categorized into monocular, stereo, RGB-D, and
multi-camera SLAM. Among these, RGB-D SLAM, which
provides a depth map as a prior, is particularly useful for
many applications such as AR/VR [1], autonomous driving
perception [2]–[6], 3D reconstruction [7]–[9], novel view
synthesis [10] and navigation [11], [12] due to its potential
∗is the corresponding author.
Fig. 1: Our final reconstruction results on the Freiburg3 long
office sequence.
to generate a dense 3D map. Bayesian methods are important
in SLAM for providing a framework of handling uncertainty
and being able to make predictions from incomplete or noisy
data [13], [14]. The SLAM problem is often formulated in
probabilistic terms, where Bayes’ theorem is used to update
the knowledge of the robot about its position and the map any
time new sensor data becomes available.
Current research, highlighted by the comprehensive in-
vestigations of Ming et al.
[15] in NeRF-based SLAM
systems. They found that traditional SLAM faces challenges
in matching sensor observations with 3D landmark points,
making geometry estimation difficult for unobserved regions
and potentially leading to tracking loss. Implicit neural repre-
sentations, like NeRF, use multi-layer perceptrons (MLPs) to
represent the scene. In addition, research fields including Edge
computing and Reinforcement learning also integrate well on
SLAM. Edge computing [16], [17] involves processing data
near the source of data generation, such as on the robot itself
or on a nearby device in the network. Reinforcement learning
[18], [19] can be used to develop optimal navigation strategies
that allow the robot to efficiently explore unknown areas
while avoiding obstacles. By learning from its environment,
the robot can make decisions that balance exploration and
arXiv:2408.05635v2  [cs.CV]  21 Aug 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
exploitation. These approaches can complement SLAM by
providing quick, localized processing while still allowing for
cloud-based analysis if needed.
They categorize NeRF-based methods in the SLAM domain
into monocular SLAM, RGB-D SLAM, LiDAR SLAM, and
multi-sensor SLAM. Additionally, they provide an overview
of the NeRF-based SLAM pipeline, illustrating the framework
and summarizing the various approaches used in NeRF-based
SLAM methods which is detailed in Figure 2. Figure 2 directly
summarizes the current methods of applying NeRF in SLAM.
Finally, they benchmark NeRF in the SLAM domain and
provide comprehensive results to evaluate NeRF-based SLAM
methods.
In contract to NeRF-based SLAM, 3D Gaussians [20]
recently have emerged as a promising 3D scene representation.
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) leverages the sparse nature of
3D environments by iterating over primitives for rasterization
instead of tracing rays, effectively capturing the details of
these scenes and speeding up rendering. There have been
many recent advancements and applications of 3DGS, such
as in the capture of static scenes where 3DGS introduces an
innovative differentiable renderer known as Fuzzy Metaballs
[21]. These facilitate low-latency differential rendering on
CPUs and focus on depicting shapes through depth maps
and silhouettes. In various vision-related tasks, particularly
dynamic scene capture
[22], 3DGS constructs an efficient
Gaussian splatting framework that accommodates changes in
Gaussian motion and shape over time, significantly improving
dynamic scene capture. In the realm of 3D generation [23],
it also adapts 3D Gaussian splatting into generative settings
for 3D content creation, significantly reducing the generation
time of optimization-based 2D lifting methods
In this paper, we aim to leverage the fast rendering per-
formance and promising explicit 3D scene representation of
3DGS [20], along with the accurate pose estimation strategy
from Stereo-NEC [24], to generate dense 3D reconstructions
while maintaining accurate camera pose estimation [25]. We
implement our pipeline using SplaTAM [26] as our foundation.
The key contributions of our proposed method are as follows:
• We employ a rotation-translation decoupled strategy com-
bined with inverse optimization to estimate accurate cam-
era poses.
• We utilize 3D Gaussian primitives to represent scenes,
facilitating dense reconstruction.
• We utilize 3D Gaussian Splatting with rasterization,
allowing for real-time differentiable optimization via
CUDA.
• We incorporate depth priors as additional regularization
to enforce geometric constraints, thereby enhancing the
accuracy of both pose estimation and 3D reconstruction.
II. PRELIMINARIES
A. Visual Geometry Residual
The visual Geometry residual, rLreproj for camera frame
at time k is defined as:
rLreproj = xi −π(·)(Rck,wXi + tck,w)
πm
 "X
Y
Z
#!
=

fx X
Z + cx
fy Y
Z + cy

, πs
 "X
Y
Z
#!
=
" fx X
Z + cx
fy Y
Z + cy
fx X−b
Z
+ cx
#
,
Xi is a 3D landmark in the world frame, derived through
stereo matching using triangulation, while xi indicates the cor-
responding 2D feature in image coordinate. The reprojection
functions, π(·), include πm for monocular reprojection and πs
for rectified stereo reprojection. A 3D landmark is denoted
as [X, Y, Z]⊤. Camera intrinsic parameter: fx and fy are the
focal lengths, cx and cy denote the principal point, and b is
the baseline of the stereo camera.
B. Neural Radiance Fields
NeRF’s core concept revolves around modeling a 3D scene
through neural networks, where the scene is encoded within
the network’ parameters. In practice, it utilizes multi-layer
perceptrons (MLPs) to map spatial locations to an implicit
representation of the surfaces of target objects or scenes.
Moreover, the vanilla NeRF approach places a strong emphasis
on volume density.
C. 3D Gaussians Splatting
3D Gaussian Splatting is another technique that allows for
novel view synthesis and 3D reconstruction. Unlike NeRF,
which uses implicit representation for the environment, 3D
Gaussian Splatting employs 3D Gaussians as primitives for
explicit 3D scene representation. This process allows for fast,
differentiable rendering of 3D scenes by projecting the 3D
Gaussians onto a pixel-based image plane, resulting in a
rendered image. Each Gaussian is represented by Equation 1
and is parameterized by only eight values: three for its RGB
color c, three for its center position µ ∈R3, one for its
radius r, and one for its opacity o ∈[0, 1]. Since 3D Gaussian
splatting is differentiable, it allows for the updating of the eight
parameters using gradient-based optimization by minimizing
the difference between the rendered image and the input
image.
f(p) = o exp(−||p −µ||2
2r2
)
(1)
Render an RGB image. Gaussian splatting renders an RGB
image by alpha-compositing as follows:
C(p) =
n
X
i=1
cifi(p)
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −fj(p))
(2)
here, fi(·) refers to the function defined in Equation 1, and ci
represents the color of the i-th 3D Gaussian.

<!-- page 3 -->
Fig. 2: Overview of NeRF-based SLAM pipeline. Figure taken from [15].
III. PROPOSED APPROACH
Our method inspired by Stereo-NEC [24], SplaTAM [26],
and BundledSLAM [28] aims to provide a SLAM system
with dense reconstruction using depth priors. During the
tracking stage, we adopt the decoupled rotation and trans-
lation estimation strategy from Stereo-NEC, using inverse
optimization. Additionally, we incorporate the 3DGS concept
from SplaTAM for 3D scene representation, which enables
the ability to synthesize novel views. Multi-camera SLAM
systems have many advantages, quite directly resulting from
the ability to incorporate information coming from a larger
field of view—leading to higher robustness and better local-
ization accuracy. This work presents a significant extension
and enhancement of the state-of-the-art stereo SLAM system,
ORB-SLAM2, with the goal of achieving even greater preci-
sion. To achieve this, first, measurements from all cameras
are projected to a common virtual camera, BundledFrame.
The virtual camera is properly designed to facilitate hassle-
free handling of multi-camera setups and an opportunity to
properly combine data obtained from individual cameras. The
benchmarks include an extensive comparison with ground
truth measurements made on the state of the art SLAM
system. The assessment is performed on the EuRoC datasets
to evaluate the performance of the system critically. The re-
sults demonstrate the superior accuracy of the BundledSLAM
system compared to existing approaches. Specifically, building
on Stereo-NEC, SplaTAM, and BundledSLAM, we separately
estimate rotation and translation using inverse optimization.
This approach directly employs differentiable rendering and
gradient-based optimization to refine both the camera pose
and the parameters of the 3D Gaussian map, based on the set
of online camera poses estimated so far.
Our method involves four steps designed to derive precise
initial values for camera state estimation and 3D Gaussian
parameter optimization. These steps are crucial for scene
representation and encoding the environment:
Fig. 3: Pipeline of NeRF. Figure taken from [27].
• Step 1. Initialization: We initialize initial 3D Gaussian
parameter by using first camera frame.
• Step 2. Pose Estimation: This step aims to estimate
camera pose incrementally.
• Step 3. Scene Optimization: This step aims to update
the parameters of the 3D Gaussian map based on the set
of online camera poses estimated so far.
A. Initialization
For the first frame, we set the camera pose as an identity
matrix and initialize new Gaussians for all pixels. For each
pixel, we create a new Gaussian with the corresponding color
of that pixel. The center of each Gaussian is set at the location
obtained by unprojecting the pixel using its corresponding
depth from the depth map. Each Gaussian is assigned an
opacity of 0.5 and a radius such that it appears as a one-
pixel radius in the 2D image, which is calculated by dividing
the depth by the focal length.
B. Pose Estimation
Pose estimation occurs during the tracking stage, aiming
to estimate the camera pose for each frame in real time. To
enable accurate pose estimation and real-time performance,
we use a different approach from the original SplaTAM, which
assumes constant velocity for the initial guess and then updates
the current camera pose via inverse optimization. This method
can provide inaccurate pose estimates during large motions or
intense rotations, leading to inferior pose estimation later.
In response, we utilize a decoupled rotation and transla-
tion strategy, iteratively updating both in several iterations
through gradient-based optimization. This process involves
differentiably rendering RGB, depth, and silhouette maps and
updating the camera parameters to minimize a combined loss
of photometric loss, depth geometry loss, and visibility loss.
The rendered depth and rendered silhouette for visibility are
illustrated in Equations 3 and
4, respectively. This method
helps maintain tracking performance, and with 3D Gaus-
sian Splatting, it also supports real-time performance during
gradient-based optimization through differentiable rendering.
Render a depth image. Gaussian splatting renders a Depth
image as follows:
D(p) =
n
X
i=1
difi(p)
i−1
Y
k=1
(1 −fk(p))
(3)

<!-- page 4 -->
where di denotes the depth of the i-th 3D Gaussian in camera
frame.
Render a silhouette image. Gaussian splatting renders a
silhouette image, which is used to determine visibility, as
follows:
S(p) =
n
X
i=1
fi(p)
i−1
Y
k=1
(1 −fk(p))
(4)
C. Scene Optimization
In this section, we aim to reconstruct a dense representation
by a set of explicit 3D Gaussians and then update the scene
through 3D Gaussian Splatting. As camera poses are updated
and new Gaussians are added, there may be duplicate 3D
Gaussians that need to be removed. Additionally, optimizing
the parameters of the 3D Gaussians is essential for accurate
scene representation. Therefore, our scene optimization pro-
cess includes both 3D Gaussian parameter optimization and
duplication removal.
Specifically, the inverse optimization in this step is per-
formed using differentiable rendering and gradient-based op-
timization, similar to the process in the tracking stage III-B.
However, unlike pose estimation, the camera poses remain
fixed, and the parameters of the Gaussians are updated. To
ensure real-time performance, we do not use all frames for
scene optimization. Instead, we use only keyframes to update
the 3D Gaussian parameters and to handle duplication. This
means new Gaussians are added only when the current frame
is a keyframe.
Our keyframe selection strategy is based on the average
parallax from the previous keyframe. If the average parallax
of tracked features between the current frame and the latest
keyframe exceeds a certain threshold, the current frame is
designated as a new keyframe.
IV. EVALUATION
A. Experiment Setup
Our proposed method is benchmarked using the TUM-
RGBD dataset [29]. TUM-RGBD is a well-known benchmark
for evaluating RGB-D SLAM systems. It includes a large
set of image sequences recorded with a Microsoft Kinect,
along with highly accurate and time-synchronized ground
truth camera poses provided by a motion capture system.
The sequences contain both color and depth images at a
full sensor resolution of 640 × 480, captured at a video
frame rate of 30 Hz. The ground truth trajectory is obtained
using a motion capture system equipped with eight high-speed
tracking cameras (100 Hz).
The dataset consists of 39 sequences recorded in various
environments, including an office and an industrial hall, cover-
ing a wide range of scenes and camera motions. TUM-RGBD
is a challenging dataset for RGB-D SLAM, especially for
dense methods, due to the poor quality of both the RGB and
depth images, as they are captured using older, lower-quality
cameras. We chose this dataset to evaluate our method due to
its difficulty.
Our method is implemented on a system with an Intel i7-
9700k @ 3.6 GHz processor, 64 GB of RAM, and an Nvidia
GeForce RTX 4080 SUPER GPU with 16 GB of memory.
B. Experiment Results
Fig. 4: Qualitative rendering results on freigburg2. The top
row, from left to right, shows the input RGB, input depth
map, and rasterized silhouette. The bottom row, from left to
right, displays the rendered RGB, rendered depth map, and
visualization of the L1 loss on the depth map.
Quantitative Evaluation: We evaluate our method on five
different challenging scenarios from the TUM-RGBD dataset.
We assess the localization performance of our method using
the absolute trajectory error (ATE), the novel view synthesis
performance using the peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR), and
the geometric representation accuracy using the root mean
square error (RMSE) of the depth map.
Fig. 5: Qualitative rendering results on freiburg3 office. The
top row, from left to right, shows the input RGB, input depth
map, and rasterized silhouette. The bottom row, from left to
right, displays the rendered RGB, rendered depth map, and
visualization of the L1 loss on the depth map.
Our method achieved localization accuracy with an average
ATE ranging from 3.49 cm to 12.52 cm across five challenging
scenarios, demonstrating its capability to deliver centimeter-
level precision in difficult indoor environments. Absolute
trajectory error (ATE) is a widely used metric for assessing

<!-- page 5 -->
TABLE I: Quantitative results for evaluating localization (↓), novel view synthesis ability (↑), and geometric accuracy (↓).
Sequence
Final Average ATE RMSE (↓)
Average PSNR (↑)
Average Depth RMSE (↓)
freiburg1 desk
3.49 cm
21.20
3.61 cm
freiburg1 desk2
6.58 cm
20.74
3.24 cm
freiburg1 room
12.52 cm
19.63
3.54 cm
freiburg2 xyz
1.41 cm
25.11
2.81 cm
freiburg3 long office household
7.92 cm
20.99
6.00 cm
TABLE II: Quantitative results for evaluating depth (↓),
Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM ↑), and Learned
Perceptual Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS ↓).
Sequence
Average Depth Loss
Average MS-SSIM
Average LPIPS
freiburg1 desk
3.61 cm
0.846
0.244
freiburg1 desk2
3.24 cm
0.839
0.253
freiburg1 room
3.54 cm
0.810
0.252
freiburg2 xyz
2.81 cm
0.955
0.073
freiburg3 long office household
6.00 cm
0.857
0.204
Fig. 6: Qualitative rendering results on freiburg1 desk. The
top row, from left to right, shows the input RGB, input depth
map, and rasterized silhouette. The bottom row, from left to
right, displays the rendered RGB, rendered depth map, and
visualization of the L1 loss on the depth map.
localization accuracy when benchmarking the tracking per-
formance of SLAM systems. The superior accuracy of our
approach is evident in the average ATE values presented in
Table II.
We also evaluate the novel view synthesis performance of
our method using PSNR, with values ranging from 19.63 to
25.11, indicating competitive performance. Additionally, we
assess geometric accuracy by computing the average depth
map RMSE, which showed depth accuracy ranging from 2.81
cm to 6 cm. These strong performances in PSNR and depth
map accuracy are highlighted in the average PSNR and average
Depth RMSE columns of Table II, respectively.
Qualitative Evaluation: Alongside the quantitative evalu-
ation, we offer a qualitative assessment as well. As illustrated
in Fig 4, we compare our rendered RGB and depth images on
Fig. 7: Qualitative rendering results on freiburg1 room. The
top row, from left to right, shows the input RGB, input depth
map, and rasterized silhouette. The bottom row, from left to
right, displays the rendered RGB, rendered depth map, and
visualization of the L1 loss on the depth map.
the Freiburg2 xyz sequence with the input images shown in
the top row. Additionally, we visualize the silhouette map to
highlight areas of new observations in the current frame where
new 3D Gaussians will be added to the map. Specifically, the
white regions indicate where these new 3D Gaussians will be
incorporated.
Similarly, Fig 7 presents our rendered results for both RGB
and depth images on the Freiburg3 long office sequence,
compared with the input images in the top row. The silhouette
map in Fig 7 shows that there are no new observations from
the current frame’s viewpoint on the Freiburg3 long office
sequence.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we introduce an innovative RGB-D SLAM
system that utilizes 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) for accurate
point cloud generation, enabling dense reconstruction and
real-time pose estimation. Our system takes advantage of
the computational efficiency of CUDA-enabled rasterization
to render both RGB and depth images. It optimizes camera
poses and 3D Gaussians by minimizing the discrepancy be-
tween the rendered images and the input images. Additionally,
through a rotation-translation decoupled strategy, our method
successfully meets the demanding requirements of real-time
performance and precise scene reconstruction.

<!-- page 6 -->
We also provide extensive evaluations on the challenging
TUM-RGBD dataset demonstrate that our method not only
meets but exceeds existing benchmarks in terms of pose
accuracy, geometric accuracy, and rendering performance.
The proposed approach shows significant promise, achieving
centimeter-level localization precision and enhanced depth
accuracy in diverse indoor settings. This underlines the ro-
bustness and reliability of our system even in environments
with poor image quality, a common challenge in practical
applications.
Furthermore, the integration of depth priors as regularization
effectively mitigates the inherent limitations of 3D Gaussian
representations, such as multi-view inconsistencies, thereby
enhancing both the accuracy of pose estimations and the
fidelity of 3D reconstructions. Our results demonstrate the
robustness of the proposed method and its potential to sig-
nificantly advance the field of visual SLAM.
Future work could explore the scalability of our approach in
larger and more dynamic environments, with the possibility of
incorporating advanced machine learning algorithms to further
refine the 3DGS technique and broaden its application. The
promising results from our study encourage ongoing research
towards fully autonomous systems capable of operating in real-
world scenarios with the same level of precision and efficiency
observed in controlled experimental settings. This work rep-
resents a notable advancement in the integration of dense 3D
reconstruction within real-time SLAM systems, opening new
avenues for immersive and interactive technologies in robotics,
augmented reality, and beyond.
REFERENCES
[1]
W. Wang, J. Li, Y. Ming, and P. Mordohai, “EDI: ESKF-based Disjoint
Initialization for Visual-Inertial SLAM Systems,” in 2023 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
2023, pp. 1466–1472.
[2]
J. Feng, L. Yang, E. Hoxha, B. Jiang, and J. Xiao, “Robotic inspection
of underground utilities for construction survey using a ground pen-
etrating radar,” Journal of Computing in Civil Engineering, vol. 37,
no. 1, p. 04 022 049, 2023.
[3]
J. Feng, L. Yang, and J. Xiao, “Subsurface object 3d modeling based
on ground penetration radar using deep neural network,” Journal of
Computing in Civil Engineering, vol. 37, no. 6, p. 04 023 030, 2023.
[4]
Y. Zhang, X. Wang, L. Gao, and Z. Liu, “Manipulator control system
based on machine vision,” in International Conference on Applications
and Techniques in Cyber Intelligence ATCI 2019: Applications and
Techniques in Cyber Intelligence 7, Springer, 2020, pp. 906–916.
[5]
L. Gao, K. Aubert, D. Saldana, C. Danielson, and R. Fierro, “Decen-
tralized adaptive aerospace transportation of unknown loads using a
team of robots,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.08084, 2024.
[6]
L. Gao, C. Danielson, and R. Fierro, “Adaptive robot detumbling of a
non-rigid satellite,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17617, 2024.
[7]
L. Chen, W. Wang, and P. Mordohai, “Learning the distribution of
errors in stereo matching for joint disparity and uncertainty estimation,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun. 2023, pp. 17 235–17 244.
[8]
W. Wang, B. Joshi, N. Burgdorfer, K. Batsosc, A. Q. Lid, P. Mordo-
haia, and I. Rekleitisb, “Real-time dense 3d mapping of underwater
environments,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA), 2023, pp. 5184–5191.
[9]
E. Hoxha, J. Feng, D. Sanakov, and J. Xiao, “Robotic inspection and
subsurface defect mapping using impact-echo and ground penetrating
radar,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 8, no. 8, pp. 4943–
4950, 2023.
[10]
Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Li, and Y. Xu, “Spacetime gaussian feature splatting
for real-time dynamic view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), Jun.
2024, pp. 8508–8520.
[11]
T. Chi, C. Zhang, Y. Song, and J. Feng, “A strategy of multi-robot
formation and obstacle avoidance in unknown environment,” in 2016
IEEE International Conference on Information and Automation (ICIA),
2016, pp. 1455–1460.
[12]
Z. Chen and L. Liu, “Navigable space construction from sparse noisy
point clouds,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 3,
pp. 4720–4727, 2021.
[13]
J. Zhuang and M. Al Hasan, “Defending graph convolutional networks
against dynamic graph perturbations via bayesian self-supervision,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 36,
2022, pp. 4405–4413.
[14]
J. Zhuang and M. Al Hasan, “Robust node classification on graphs:
Jointly from bayesian label transition and topology-based label propa-
gation,” in Proceedings of the 31st ACM International Conference on
Information & Knowledge Management, 2022, pp. 2795–2805.
[15]
Y. Ming, X. Yang, W. Wang, Z. Chen, J. Feng, Y. Xing, and G.
Zhang, “Benchmarking neural radiance fields for autonomous robots:
An overview,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.05526, 2024.
[16]
C. Li, X. Wang, T. Zong, H. Cao, and Y. Liu, “Predictive edge caching
through deep mining of sequential patterns in user content retrievals,”
Computer Networks, vol. 233, p. 109 866, 2023.
[17]
T. Zong, C. Li, Y. Lei, G. Li, H. Cao, and Y. Liu, “Cocktail edge
caching: Ride dynamic trends of content popularity with ensemble
learning,” IEEE/ACM Transactions on Networking, vol. 31, no. 1,
pp. 208–219, 2022.
[18]
Z. Li, A. Samanta, Y. Li, A. Soltoggio, H. Kim, and C. Liu, “R3: On-
device real-time deep reinforcement learning for autonomous robotics,”
in 2023 IEEE Real-Time Systems Symposium (RTSS), 2023, pp. 131–
144.
[19]
Z. Li, T. Ren, X. He, and C. Liu, “Red: A systematic real-time schedul-
ing approach for robotic environmental dynamics,” in 2023 IEEE Real-
Time Systems Symposium (RTSS), IEEE, 2023, pp. 210–223.
[20]
B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Transactions on
Graphics, vol. 42, no. 4, Jul. 2023.
[21]
L. Keselman and M. Hebert, “Approximate differentiable rendering
with algebraic surfaces,” in European Conference on Computer Vision,
Springer, 2022, pp. 596–614.
[22]
G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, W. Liu, Q. Tian,
and X. Wang, “4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene
rendering,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 20 310–20 320.
[23]
J. Tang, J. Ren, H. Zhou, Z. Liu, and G. Zeng, “Dreamgaussian:
Generative gaussian splatting for efficient 3d content creation,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2309.16653, 2023.
[24]
W. Wang, C. Chou, G. Sevagamoorthy, K. Chen, Z. Chen, Z. Feng,
Y. Xia, F. Cai, Y. Xu, and P. Mordohai, “Stereo-nec: Enhancing stereo
visual-inertial slam initialization with normal epipolar constraints,” in
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
2024.
[25]
H. Song, Z. Qu, Z. Zhang, Z. Ye, and C. Liu, “Eta-init: Enhancing
the translation accuracy for stereo visual-inertial slam initialization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.15082, 2024.
[26]
N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, “Splatam: Splat track & map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21 357–21 366.
[27]
B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ra-
mamoorthi, and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance
fields for view synthesis,” in Computer Vision – ECCV 2020, Springer
International Publishing, 2020, pp. 405–421.
[28]
H. Song, C. Liu, and H. Dai, “Bundledslam: An accurate visual slam
system using multiple cameras,” in 2024 IEEE 7th Advanced Infor-
mation Technology, Electronic and Automation Control Conference
(IAEAC), vol. 7, 2024, pp. 106–111.
[29]
J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cremers,
“A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems,” in 2012
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems,
2012, pp. 573–580.
