<!-- page 1 -->
Visual Localization in 3D Maps: Comparing Point Cloud,
Mesh, and NeRF Representations
Lintong Zhang1*, Yifu Tao1, Jiarong Lin2, Fu Zhang2, Maurice Fallon1
1*Dept. of Engineering Science, Univ. of Oxford, Pok Fu Lam, Hong Kong, China.
2Dept. of Mechanical Engineering, Univ. of Hong Kong, Wellington Square, Oxford, UK.
*Corresponding author(s). E-mail(s): lintong@robots.ox.ac.uk;
Contributing authors: yifu@robots.ox.ac.uk; zivlin@connect.hku.hk; fuzhang@hku.hk;
mfallon@robots.ox.ac.uk;
Abstract
Recent advances in mapping techniques have enabled the creation of highly accurate dense 3D maps
during robotic missions, such as point clouds, meshes, or NeRF-based representations. These devel-
opments present new opportunities for reusing these maps for localization. However, there remains
a lack of a unified approach that can operate seamlessly across different map representations. This
paper presents and evaluates a global visual localization system capable of localizing a single camera
image across various 3D map representations built using both visual and lidar sensing. Our system
generates a database by synthesizing novel views of the scene, creating RGB and depth image pairs.
Leveraging the precise 3D geometric map, our method automatically defines rendering poses, reduc-
ing the number of database images while preserving retrieval performance. To bridge the domain gap
between real query camera images and synthetic database images, our approach utilizes learning-
based descriptors and feature detectors. We evaluate the system’s performance through extensive
real-world experiments conducted in both indoor and outdoor settings, assessing the effectiveness of
each map representation and demonstrating its advantages over traditional structure-from-motion
(SfM) localization approaches. The results show that all three map representations can achieve con-
sistent localization success rates of 55 % and higher across various environments. NeRF synthesized
images show superior performance, localizing query images at an average success rate of 72 %. Fur-
thermore, we demonstrate an advantage over SfM-based approaches that our synthesized database
enables localization in the reverse travel direction which is unseen during the mapping process. Our
system, operating in real-time on a mobile laptop equipped with a GPU, achieves a processing rate
of 1 Hz.
Keywords: Localization, Mapping, Sensor Fusion, RGB-D Perception
1 Introduction
Recognizing a previously visited place and esti-
mating a robot/sensor’s accurate metric pose is
fundamental to the problem of robot localization.
Localization not only addresses the question of
determining where a robot is, but it also enables
other tasks such as loop detection in Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM), multi-robot
or multi-session mapping, and augmented reality.
Robot localization can be achieved using dif-
ferent sensor modalities, with camera [1–3] and
1
arXiv:2408.11966v2  [cs.CV]  19 Oct 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
Fig. 1: Localization of a single query image to a database of images that are synthesized from either
point cloud, mesh, or NeRF representations of Blenheim Palace. After identifying a matching image in
the database, features are extracted with SuperPoint (as shown above) and matched with SuperGlue.
(Displayed point cloud is not directly used.)
lidar-based approaches [4–6] the most commonly
studied. While cameras offer a compact form fac-
tor and are often low-cost, visual localization and
mapping systems often struggle to build large
scale accurate 3D maps, especially in real time.
Conversely, lidar systems are physically bigger,
have higher power consumption and increased
cost — factors which pose challenges for their
widespread deployment on mobile robots. Because
of this, researchers have proposed combining the
advantages of both sensors by constructing a 3D
dense map using lidar data (potentially aided by
cameras), and then performing localization using
only the camera [7, 8].
For any localization system, a prior represen-
tation of the scene—a prior map—is required. The
prior map is usually built using the same sensor
modality that will be used for later deployment.
For example, autonomous industrial inspection
has been demonstrated using legged platforms
equipped with lidar [9], where a prior map is
built by accumulating laser scans, and localization
is performed against the map using of ICP [10].
However, lidar localisation is sensitive to phys-
ical scene changes and relies on a good initial
estimate for ICP registration. Conversely, purely
visual localization methods typically build a map
using a structure-from-motion pipeline (SfM) such
as COLMAP [11], and then localize within it
using visual place recognition followed pose refine-
ment using methods such as perspective-n-points
(PnP) [1]. SfM maps could, however, be inflexi-
ble as they are constrained to the local descriptors
used to build them. The pose estimated achieved
by visual localization within a SfM map are
not scaled to real-world dimensions. As a result,
additional information is required for effective
deployment in robotic applications. Furthermore,
these methods are generally not real-time as the
SfM bundle adjustment process can take anywhere
from a few hours to an entire day, depending on
the size of the images or the map.
Achieving cross-modal localization is typically
a more challenging problem due to the inherent
differences in sensing modalities and map rep-
resentations. While lidar-based localization often
utilizes point cloud maps, some applications may
only have access to a colored mesh-based build-
ing model [12]. In contrast, visual localization
methods rely on a database of 3D points with
2

<!-- page 3 -->
associated descriptors, specifically tailored to the
feature detectors used during the map construc-
tion [2, 3]. Moreover, emerging scene representa-
tions such as NeRF [13] and Gaussian Splatting
[14] are also dependent on the specifics of the
original sensing setup. The variety of map repre-
sentations poses challenges when applying existing
localization approaches.
There has been many recent advances in
high-quality 3D color mapping — using either
mobile SLAM or fixed TLS data. This has cre-
ates new avenues for research into techniques
which repurpose these maps for robotic localisa-
tion. We propose to create a unified synthetic map
representation/database that accommodates the
different types of maps produced by these new
mapping systems. In particular, these 3D mapping
systems enable the rendering of novel synthetic
images from arbitrary rendering positions. In our
approach, the visual localisation database is made
up of rendered RGB and depth images at cho-
sen poses and can be automatically synthesized
from color point clouds, meshes, or NeRF maps.
These 3D color maps can be built using vision and
lidar data acquired from either industrial-grade
Terrestrial Laser Scanners (TLS) or hand-held
mapping devices. Using this unified representa-
tion, we achieve scalable global localization in
varied environments, resilient to scene changes
and lighting variations with visual learning based
components. An overview of the system opera-
tion is shown in Fig. 1. In addition, we perform
a direct comparison with SfM methods to demon-
strate the capability of synthesizing views in the
opposite direction of travel, as well as highlighting
the advantage of reducing the number of required
database images. All experiments are conducted
in real-world environments, and the correspond-
ing datasets and ground truth maps are available
as part of the Oxford Spires Dataset 1.
The key contributions of our work include:
• A versatile and unified approach for global
visual localization of a single camera in dense
3D maps, using a database of synthetic RGB
and depth images generated from point cloud,
mesh, or NeRF representations.
1https://dynamic.robots.ox.ac.uk/datasets/oxford-spires/
• A strategy for automatically determining the
poses within the color 3D maps from which the
synthetic images should be generated.
• An extensive evaluation across both indoor
and outdoor environments comparing visual
localisation performance across different map
representations.
• A performance comparison between the our
localization system with synthetic images and
two (purely) visual localization systems with
real images.
Our streamlined system operates on a mobile
laptop at 1Hz — and is thus suitable for real-time
operation.
2 Related Work
We define localization as the process of estimat-
ing the 6 DoF pose of a sensor within a 3D prior
map or database. This is commonly achieved by
means of a place recognition stage—which finds
place candidates in the prior map—, and a regis-
tration step—that estimates a precise 6 DoF pose
using the candidates. Given two sensing inputs
of vision and lidar, the current literature can be
categorized into four categories — based on sens-
ing modality. These include (a) visual localization
within a visual map, (b) lidar localization within
a lidar prior map, (c) combined visual and lidar
localization within a joint visual and lidar map,
and (d) cross-modality visual localization within
a lidar prior map or vice versa.
2.1 Visual Localization
Visual localization methods aim to obtain a 6 DoF
pose by localizing against a map built from multi-
ple images. In general, such maps are built using
Structure-from-Motion (SfM) pipelines [11], which
are able to recover the 3D structure from multiple
views. Given that this reconstruction is accurate
up to a scale factor, additional prior information,
such as knowledge of a stereo baseline or direct
depth sensing, is required for metric localization.
For localization, visual place recognition is
implemented
as
an
image
retrieval
problem.
Classic methods such as FAB-MAP [15] and
DBoW
[16]
solve
the
problem
using
local
features,
but
more
recent
methods
such
as
NetVLAD [17], PatchNetVLAD [18], EigenPlaces
3

<!-- page 4 -->
[19], MixVPR [20] rely entirely on neural archi-
tectures to obtain global descriptors for retrieval.
Metric pose estimation is then performed via
local feature matching using approaches such as
SIFT [21], SuperPoint [22], or R2D2 [23]. This
type of pipeline has been implemented in methods
such as HLoc [1] and [2], which employ a hierar-
chical approach to large-scale visual localization.
In
addition
to
the
aforementioned
meth-
ods, alternative approaches have been explored
in visual localization in more recent studies.
MeshLoc [24] shows it is feasible to construct
a dense 3D mesh model from multi-view stereo
point clouds and to render synthetic images via
an OpenGL pipeline to create a visual database.
However, a key limitation of MeshLoc is that the
retrieval step relies on a database of real images,
again limiting the specific location and direction
of the localisation. In another study, [25] opts for
a different retrieval approach. Rather than using
a global descriptor for a query image, they detect
instances of buildings in outdoor environments
and retrieve the best match from a database of
buildings. They show improvement in long-term
and large-scale localization datasets over classic
hierarchical frameworks.
Works by Trivigno et al. [26] and Zhang et
al. [27] employed an iterative strategy to render
images and to refine the pose set based on a query
image. While this is an effective approach for solv-
ing single query images, it requires an initial pose
estimate and lacks the real-time capability needed
for robotic applications.
2.2 Lidar Localization
Similar to visual localization, lidar localization
also maintains a map database—in this case of 3D
lidar scans. A hierarchical approach to retrieval
and matching typically relies on generating global
descriptors from each lidar scan. Early work
started with handcrafted descriptors. Himstedt et
al. [28] draw inspiration from the bag-of-words
approach and transform 2D lidar scans into a his-
togram representation for place recognition. He
et al. [29] project the 3D point cloud into mul-
tiple 2D planes, generating descriptors for each
of the planes based on point density, and com-
bining them into a global descriptor. More recent
work has moved towards learned global descrip-
tors. Vidanapathirana et al. [5] and Uy et al.
[6] both leverage deep learning networks and are
able to produce robust global descriptors for loop
closure in outdoor large-scale environments.
Recent
work
in
lidar
localization
tech-
niques has increasingly integrated semantics and
extracted segments within the lidar point cloud.
Kong et al. [30] introduce a place recognition
approach based on a semantic graph, preserving
the topological information of the point cloud.
They show that by working on a semantic level,
their method can be more robust to environmen-
tal changes. Aiming to address the same chal-
lenge, Segmap [31] introduces a segment-based
map representation and generates descriptors for
these segments using a learned network. These
descriptors serve multiple purposes: localization,
map reconstruction, and semantic information
extraction. Building upon the segment concept,
Locus [32] further extends the approach by com-
bining descriptors of all segments with spatio-
temporal high-order pooling to generate fixed-size
global descriptors, which are effective for place
recognition. This method was demonstrated to
achieve robustness in challenging scenarios such as
viewpoint changes and occlusions. However, there
are unique challenges for indoor environments, as
objects can clutter the room in confined spaces,
leading to more occlusions. InstaLoc [33] demon-
strated good performance for indoor localization
by extracting object instances and generating a
descriptor for each object before globally matching
these objects to estimate the pose.
2.3 Combined Visual/Lidar
Localization
In scenarios where multiple sensors are available
on a mobile robotic platform, some approaches
fuse information from both cameras and lidars for
localization within a combined image and lidar
database. Oneshot [34] customizes a network to
generate descriptors from both lidar segments and
their corresponding images from a camera. It esti-
mates the sensor pose by extracting segments from
a lidar scan and matching their descriptors to a
database. The study demonstrates an enhanced
retrieval rate when integrating visual informa-
tion compared to lidar data alone. Bernreiter et
al. [35] utilizes a spherical representation to gen-
erate descriptors for associated lidar scans and
images. A notable advantage of their approach
4

<!-- page 5 -->
is the flexibility in accommodating different cam-
era and lidar sensor configurations during both
training and querying stages.
In recent work, Adafusion [36] introduces a
method that employs adaptive weighting on image
and lidar pairs to generate descriptors through
an attention network. An adaptive weight allows
for different contributions from each sensor, and
the results show improved retrieval rates and
robustness to changing environments. LC2 [37]
is an alternative method wherein 2D images and
3D lidar point clouds are both converted into
2.5D depth images. Then, a network is trained
to extract global descriptors from disparity and
range images. By reducing modality discrepancy,
their method can perform well in very different
lighting conditions across multiple missions.
2.4 Cross-Modal Localization
For cross-modal localization, most previous work
uses a camera to localize in a lidar map. These
works
are
the
most
relevant
to
our
paper.
EdgeMap [38] extracts straight lines from the
point cloud map to build a 3D edge map, and
applies an edge filter for the camera image. Based
on a particle filter, the likelihood of each pose
hypothesis is calculated through the filtered cam-
era image and the edge map. Building upon the
line extraction idea, Yu et al. [39] extract lines
from both the camera image and the lidar map.
With a predicted pose from a visual odome-
try (VO) system, the camera pose is iteratively
optimized by minimizing projection error based
on 2D-3D line correspondence. They demonstrate
that their method can greatly reduce drift by reg-
istering live images to the lidar map. However,
these methods primarily apply to structured envi-
ronments where lines and edges are prominent
features.
Within the context of autonomous driving,
researchers have also been developing localization
approaches utilizing inexpensive and readily avail-
able camera sensors. Wolcott et al. [7] propose
a method to generate a greyscale synthetic view
from a mesh map through shading. By minimiz-
ing the normalized mutual information between
live and synthetic images, this method estimates
a pose within the lidar prior map. Similarly, Pas-
coe et al. [8] synthesize color images from a color
textured mesh and can further compensate for
camera calibration changes. Synthetic images pro-
duced by this (ten year old) work was rather
limited, and localization success was constrained
to the vehicle’s path with fixed viewing angles.
Very recently, more improvements have been
made to enhance cross-modal image-to-lidar reg-
istration methods. Approaches like Zuo et al. [40]
register dense stereo depth to a lidar map to cor-
rect for visual odometry drift. Based on semantic
scene understanding, [41] utilizes the point cloud
map and its semantic labels to generate a prior
semantic map. During runtime, semantic cues are
extracted from live images to localize within the
prior semantic map. Both methods fall within the
context of camera-lidar registration, which require
an initial guess—a relative pose prior. In our work,
we focus on global localization without any pose
prior information.
3 Method
3.1 Problem Definition
Our goal is to estimate the position and orienta-
tion of a single live RGB camera in a prior map,
M = {I1, D1, I2, D2, ..., In, Dn}, where Ii, Di is
the i-th synthesized RGB and depth image pair,
that are rendered at TWMi. The relevant frames are
the earth-fixed world frame W, and the map image
frame Mi.
Unless specified otherwise, the position pWMi
and orientation RWMi
of the map image are
expressed in world coordinates, with TWM ∈SE(3)
as the corresponding homogeneous transform.
We aim to determine the pose of the live cam-
era image C at a given time relative to a prior map
image, defined as follows:
TCMi ≜[ti, Ri] ∈SO(3) × R3
(1)
where ti ∈R3 is the translation and Ri ∈
SO(3) is the orientation of C relative to Mi. Given
TWMi is known, we can find the live camera image
pose in the world frame TWC.
3.2 System Overview
We propose a method that integrates learning-
based approaches with classical visual geometry
to achieve image localization within a color lidar
3D map. The system design is illustrated in Fig. 2,
which shows that the system uses a color 3D map
5

<!-- page 6 -->
(a) Step 1: Constructing a visual database from a color 3D map.
(b) Step 2: A live camera image being matched against a rendered image to obtain a relative pose estimate
Fig. 2: Overview of the system showing localization of a camera in the 3D prior map. The blue boxes
represent data, and the white boxes represent algorithms.
(either point cloud, mesh or NeRF based) to gen-
erate synthetic RGB and depth images (Step 1).
Using these images, we then construct a database
of global descriptors. During live operation (Step
2), the system receives a query image and gen-
erates a descriptor. It then retrieves the closest
match in the database. Learned local features are
extracted from the images and matched. After
retrieving the corresponding depth image, the
camera pose can then be estimated based on the
matched image features and their positions in the
world frame.
3.3 Pose Selection when Rendering
a Visual Database
A key step is how to decide the set of poses
in the 3D prior map from which the artificial
images should be synthesized. The goal is to ren-
der a reasonably low number of images (to keep
the map database small) while achieving cover-
age across the point cloud or mesh. This step
is crucial because it can directly affect both the
database size and the available camera views,
which influences the overall localization perfor-
mance. Optimal place recognition can be com-
promised if the virtual camera is positioned in
an unsuitable location—where the map is incom-
plete, or the camera does not visualize during
Fig. 3: Steps to establish a set of plausible ren-
dering positions within a 3D map, which we call
a “free path corridor”. The map is split into
floors and top-down images are rendered contain-
ing all the upward-facing points (selected using
their normals). The orange points indicate the
final selected positions.
localization. Our approach involves automatically
identifying free space within the map and strategi-
cally selecting rendering poses along a “free path
corridor”.
6

<!-- page 7 -->
To address this, we propose a straightforward
yet effective method that utilizes geometry and
image processing to select rendering poses.
For multi-floor building scans, we calculate
normals using data from the TLS scans or the
SLAM point cloud map. Planes are then extracted
by filtering based on normal directions. Each floor
plane can be isolated by constructing a histogram
counting the number of points with normals facing
upwards by point height. Subsequently, we con-
vert each floor plane point cloud into a top-down
image and subject this image to a sequence of
image processing techniques to determine the rea-
sonable walking area, as shown in Fig. 3. Dilation
and erosion operations are applied to close small
holes, followed by a normalized distance trans-
form to identify the center of all the free spaces. A
smoothed version of the primary “free path corri-
dor” is produced using thresholding and Gaussian
blurring. Finally, a thinning step is implemented
to derive a skeleton representing the path of all the
walkable space, which is then sampled to obtain
a set of rendering positions. We generate four
RGB/depth camera image pairs for every position
along the path — forward, back, and two side-
facing views. This method is used for all of the 3D
prior map representations: point clouds, meshes,
and NeRF representations.
3.4 Generating Synthetic Images
We aim to generate synthetic RGB and depth
image pairs rendered from selected poses using
one of our three prior map representations. This
section describes the construction of each map rep-
resentation which in turn facilitates the generation
of synthetic images for localization.
3.4.1 Render Images from Point
Clouds
Point clouds are point samples represented within
a 3D coordinate system, sampling an object’s or
scene’s external surface. Point clouds are com-
monly produced by technologies such as lidar
scanning and TLS. In our study, we do not utilize
point clouds derived from a SLAM system (such as
FastLIO [42]), we instead use our TLS-generated
point clouds as they are also used to generate
precise ground truth maps with millimeter-level
measurement accuracy. Further details about the
TLS scanning process are provided in Sec. 4.3.
To generate RGB and depth images from the
point cloud, we utilize the rendering capabilities of
Open3D [43], which leverages an OpenGL frame-
work2. Optimal renders are achieved by strategi-
cally positioning several light sources around the
scene to facilitate specular reflections and shini-
ness. Cameras are placed and maneuvered within
the point cloud according to the predefined render-
ing poses (from the previous subsection). For each
pose, 3D points are projected into the camera’s
field of view using a pinhole projection model,
which allows the pixel size of each point to be
adjusted.
Positioning the camera close to a wall causes
gaps between points when using a small fixed pixel
size, leading to a see-through effect in the rendered
image, as illustrated on the left side of Fig. 4. To
address this issue, the pixel size of rendered points
is varied according to an inverse depth strategy , as
detailed in Eq. (2). This approach ensures that the
pixel size remains within the designated maximum
and minimum splatting sizes. z(u,v) represents the
depth of a point in 3D space relative to the camera
frame.
ρ(u,v) = min[max[ ρmax
z(u,v)
, ρmin], ρmax]
(2)
Due to a limitation imposed by OpenGL,
adjusting individual point sizes dynamically is not
feasible, as the parallel processing architecture
requires a uniform point size for effective splatting.
To circumvent this limitation, we applied Eq. (2)
by rendering multiple frames, each with a point
size determined by the maximum and minimum
point depths within the scene. These frames are
then combined to compose the scene’s final RGB
and depth image. This is illustrated in Fig. 5,
showcasing how four images rendered with dif-
ferent point sizes are merged into a single RGB
image.
3.4.2 Render Images from Textured
Meshes
Meshes are widely used in robotics as dense rep-
resentations for 3D scenes and objects. A mesh
is a set of point vertices and the edges between
2OpenGL, Khronos Group, https://www.opengl.org/
7

<!-- page 8 -->
Fig. 4: Images from the left and right sides illus-
trate the before and after of rendered images from
the point cloud when utilizing an adjustable point
size based on the distance to the virtual camera.
Fig. 5: Illustration of merging point cloud ren-
dered images of different point sizes to get the final
RGB and depth images.
them which together form a set of polygonal
faces. Textured meshes are a popular method for
representing static 3D scenes [44, 45], as they
allow surfaces to be textured with color images,
accurately capturing the scene’s appearance.
In our experiments, we extend our previous
framework on mesh reconstruction, ImMesh [46],
to reconstruct the triangular mesh of scenes cap-
tured using lidar scans. ImMesh initiates this pro-
cess by estimating the pose of the lidar, followed
by registering each scan to a global map. This
map is partitioned into fixed-sized volumetric vox-
els. Mesh reconstruction is carried out online using
an incremental, voxel-wise meshing algorithm. Ini-
tially, all points within a voxel are projected onto
an estimated principal plane to reduce dimen-
sionality. Subsequently, the triangular mesh is
reconstructed through a series of voxel-wise oper-
ations: mesh pull, commit, and push steps. For
more detailed information about the mesh con-
struction process, readers are referred to Section
VI of [46]. ImMesh is designed to efficiently recon-
struct the mesh of large-scale scenes in real time
while maintaining high geometric accuracy.
However, further modifications were necessary
to color and texture the mesh reconstruction.
While ImMesh constructs a mesh of a scene with
adjacent triangle facets connected by edges, these
facets lack color information. To address this
issue, we use color images captured by the visual
camera to texture the facets. The camera poses
and image exposure time can be estimated using
R3LIVE++ [47]. To enhance the smoothness and
natural appearance of the mesh texture, for each
triangle facet T i, we blend images captured by the
n nearest viewing cameras to form its texture Ii
(in our experiment, n is set to 5). The pixel value
Ii (u, v) at position (u, v) is blended as follows:
Ii (u, v) = 1
¯σ
n
X
j=1

σj · Ij (π(Rj, tj, P))

(3)
¯σ = 1
n
n
X
j=1
σj,
P = A−1(ui, vj) ∈R3
(4)
where π(Rj, tj, P) is the camera projection func-
tion that projects a 3D point P (on the triangle
facet T i) to the image plane using the estimated
camera pose (Rj, tj). σj denotes the estimated
exposure for the j-th image, and A(·) is the wrap
transform that maps P on facet T i to (u, v) in tex-
ture coordinates, which can be written as (u, v) =
A(P).
After reconstructing the textured mesh, we
generate synthetic images of the captured scene.
This process is accomplished by rendering the
mesh into RGB and depth images using OpenGL
with the predetermined rendering poses (the
approach described in 3.3).
3.4.3 Render Images from Neural
Radiance Fields
NeRF is an emerging 3D representation that is
particularly effective for photorealistic novel view
synthesis. NeRF uses an implicit representation,
usually a Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) [48], to
8

<!-- page 9 -->
model a radiance field. The scene is represented
as a function whose inputs include a 3D location
x = (x, y, z) and a 2D viewing direction (θ, ϕ).
The output of the function is a color c = (r, g, b)
and volume density σ.
The optimization of a NeRF is based on regu-
lating the rendered image using the input image as
the ground truth. Given the extrinsics and intrin-
sics of the camera, an image can be represented
as a collection of rays r(t) = o + td. The expected
color of each ray can be computed from the points
sampled along the ray using volumetric integra-
tion with quadrature approximation [49, 50] as
ˆcu = PN
i=0 wici, where:
wi = exp
 
−
i−1
X
j=1
δjσj
!
(1 −exp (−δiσi)).
(5)
Early NeRF formulations were very compu-
tationally intensive — with training typically
taking days until convergence. Explicit represen-
tations such as voxels [51, 52] and 3D Gaussians
[53] have been shown to accelerate training and
rendering substantially. Nerfstudio [54] is a well-
supported open-source project which incorporates
these representations. It also includes features
that are effective when working with real-world
data, namely scene contraction [55] which can bet-
ter represent unbounded scenes, and appearance
encoding [56] which can model per-image appear-
ance changes including lighting conditions and
weather.
As with traditional visual 3D reconstruction
systems such as Multi-view Stereo, it is diffi-
cult for NeRF to reconstruct textureless surfaces
or locations with limited multi-view input. How-
ever, accurate depth is important for retrieval and
matching, as described in Sec. 3.5. In addition,
training a single NeRF for a large-scale scene is dif-
ficult due to relative small model size and limited
computational hardware.
In this work we use our previous work on
visual-lidar NeRF mapping called SiLVR (Scal-
able Lidar-Visual Reconstruction) [57]. SiLVR
builds upon the vision-based Nerfstudio pipeline
by adding strong geometry regularization using
the lidar depth measurements. With volumetric
rendering, one can render both the expected depth
and surface normal. SiLVR uses depth regular-
ization [58] to encourage the ray distribution to
follow a narrow normal distribution by minimizing
the KL-Divergence between them:
LDepth =
X
r∈R
KL[N(D, ˆσ)∥w(t)]
(6)
Additionally, SiLVR adds surface normal reg-
ularization to enhance the surface reconstruction.
We use the same loss function as MonoSDF [59],
but instead of learning-based surface normal pre-
diction for supervision, we estimate surface nor-
mals directly using the lidar range image. The
rendered surface normal is computed as the nega-
tive gradient of the density field and is supervised
using the following loss function:
LNormal =
X
r∈R
∥ˆN(r)−¯N(r)∥1+
1 −ˆN(r)⊤¯N(r)

1
(7)
When training the NeRF model, there are
several other considerations. Training large-scale
scenes (such as Blenheim Palace in Fig. 1) usu-
ally leads to inferior results compared to a smaller
scene. One reason for this is the limited model size
— the representation power of our learnt model
is determined partially by the number of param-
eters that can be optimised. A relatively small
model trained with a large dataset can lead to
under-fitting. Additionally, loading thousands of
images from a large-scale scene into RAM mem-
ory is not always practical. Therefore, SiLVR
adopts a submapping system to divide the scene
into smaller overlapping submaps. Specifically, the
submaps are created by applying Spectral Clus-
tering [60] to divide the full global trajectory into
smaller sections. The submaps overlap — with
part of the global trajectory reused at the submap
boundaries. This allows a smooth transition from
one submap to another.
3.5 Retrieval and Matching
Upon completion of the synthetic image gen-
eration process and the subsequent creation of
corresponding depth images, the resulting image
database is then input into the NetVLAD [17]
network. This network is built with a convolu-
tional neural network and a special VLAD layer.
9

<!-- page 10 -->
The central element of VLAD layer is inspired
by the image representation technique known as
the Vector of Locally Aggregated Descriptors. The
network generates descriptors capable of accu-
rately identifying the location of the query image,
even amidst significant clutter (e.g., people, cars),
variations in viewpoint, and stark differences in
illumination, including day and night conditions.
The descriptors of all the rendered RGB images
are stored in the KDTree data structure for future
indexing.
Upon receiving an incoming live camera image,
our system initially undergoes a distortion correc-
tion process before being subjected to the same
NetVLAD network. This step produces a descrip-
tor for the live camera image. Afterward, the
KD-Tree retrieves the virtual image that exhibits
the closest match based on the descriptor values.
For the pair of matched cameras and virtual
images obtained in the aforementioned step, local
features are extracted using the SuperPoint algo-
rithm. Due to the large domain gap between the
synthetic-to-real images, we observe traditional,
not learning-based feature detectors, such as SIFT
[21], fail to detect common features. SuperPoint is
first pre-trained on a synthetic dataset, boosting
the domain adaptation performance. Then Super-
Point is further trained with a multi-scale, multi-
transform augmentation, enabling self-supervised
training of interest point detectors. This gives
SuperPoint the properties of repeatable feature
detection across different view angles.
Subsequently, these local features are matched
through SuperGlue [61]. The SuperGlue network
constitutes a Graph Neural Network coupled with
an Optimal Matching layer, which is trained
specifically to conduct matching on two sets of
sparse image features.
Finally, with access to the matched local fea-
tures and the depth image, the Perspective-n-
Point (PnP)[62] algorithm is used to estimate the
relative pose between the live camera image and
the rendered reference image. Based on the known
pose of the reference image, we can triangulate the
live query image in the color 3D map. The pseudo
algorithm describing the details of the matching
process is shown in Algo. 1; note that we utilize
the confidence score from the SuperGlue network
to filter out bad matches.
Algorithm 1 Query pose estimation with refer-
ence image.
Input: camera
intrinsic
fx, fy, cx, cy,
depth
image D, reference image pose in world frame
TW R
Output: TW Q (query image camera pose in
world frame)
1: for i = 1, 2, . . . , N matched keypoint do
2:
qu, qv ←query image keypoint[i]
3:
ru, rv ←reference image keypoint[i]
4:
depth Pz ←D[v][u]
5:
Px ←(ru −cx) ∗z/fx
6:
Py ←(rv −cy) ∗z/fy
7:
if match confidence score ω > 0 then
8:
3d points ←[Px, Py, Pz]
9:
image points ←[qu, qv]
10:
end if
11: end for
12: if image points ≤6 then
13:
TQR , success ←perspective N points with
(3D points, image points)
14:
if success then
15:
Return TW Q = TW R ∗T −1
QR
16:
end if
17: end if
3.6 Implementation Details
For NeRF 3D reconstruction, we train each SiLVR
map over 150,000 iterations, with 4096 rays sam-
pled from the training set in each iteration. This
takes around 5 hours on average for all experi-
ments on a single Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU.
For the localization system, the input RGB
images have 720×540 pixels resolution, and we
use off-the-shelf pre-trained networks. Specifically,
we use a pre-trained NetVLAD backbone based
on VGG16, trained on the Pitts30K [63] dataset.
Additionally, the SuperGlue network we use is pre-
trained on ScanNet data [64] for indoor scenes and
MegaDepth data [65] for outdoor environments.
The localization part of the system (Step 2)
is designed for real-time applications. Upon ini-
tialization, all rendered images are loaded, global
descriptors are extracted for KDTree indexing,
and local features are stored in memory. All algo-
rithms are implemented on a Dell laptop with an
Intel Core i7-9850H CPU running at 2.60GHz and
a Nvidia Quadro T2000 GPU with 4GB of mem-
ory. The online localization pipeline processes each
10

<!-- page 11 -->
input image in approximately 0.5 seconds, with
the following upper limits for each step: global
descriptor generation (200ms), KDTree retrieval
(1ms), local feature detection (60ms), local feature
matching (100ms), and pose estimation (60ms).
These performance metrics enable the system to
comfortably operate at 1 Hz.
4 Experiment Setup and
Hardware
4.1 Dataset
We collected two recordings at each location: one
was used to build the prior map and to render
the database images, and the second was used for
localization testing. The recordings were collected
with a walking speed of around 1m/s. The test
locations had the following distinct characteris-
tics:
• ORI [indoor] was collected at the Oxford
Robotics Institute. The ORI dataset encom-
passes indoor environments such as office rooms,
staircases, and a kitchen. This dataset is char-
acterized by faster camera rotation movements
than the outdoor dataset with the content in the
images changing quickly as the recording device
moves from room to room.
• Math [outdoor, medium scale] was collected
outside the Oxford Mathematics Institute on a
summer’s day. This dataset is characterized by
substantial lighting variations, with transitions
between areas of direct sunlight and shadows
cast by the buildings. The presence of bushes,
trees, and lawns increases the complexity of the
image rendering.
• Blenheim [outdoor, large scale] was collected at
Blenheim Palace, a 300-year-old country house
in Woodstock, Oxfordshire. It captures walking
sequences within the palace courtyard, partially
extending into the palace’s main hall. This
dataset is challenging as images often contain
significant portions of ground and sky, while the
geometric symmetry of the courtyard further
adds complexity.
The test recording, ORI, was collected across 7
office rooms spread over 2 floors with a total tra-
jectory length of 125 m. The Math trajectory is
451 m long, and the Blenheim trajectory is 386m
long.
Fig. 6: Frontier multi-sensor unit consists of a
3D lidar, 3 orthogonal cameras and an IMU (left
image). A fisheye image overlaid with lidar points
(right image), demonstrating accurate intrinsic
and extrinsic calibration (red lines are manually
added to highlight the depth change).
Again please note that the datasets and ground
truth maps used here are part of the Oxford Spires
Dataset mentioned in Sec. 1 .
4.2 Hardware - Frontier
All experimental data was collected using a Fron-
tier, Fig. 6, a self-developed multi-sensor unit con-
sisting of a Sevensense Alphasense Multi-Camera
kit with 3 orthogonal cameras of 1440×1080 pixels
resolution. The device contains a Hesai QT lidar
with 64 beams and 104.2◦vertical field of view.
Note that the Hesai lidar is used to build the mesh
and NeRF maps and generate ground truth poses.
The extrinsic calibration between the lidar and
camera is established following the methodology
outlined in [66], ensuring sub-millimeter accuracy
in translation and sub-degree precision in rota-
tions. Accurate calibration is crucial, as shown in
Fig. 6, particularly for accurately overlaying lidar
scans onto color images when reconstructing color
3D maps.
4.3 Ground Truth Maps and
Trajectories
To generate ground truth point cloud maps, we
used a (professional grade) Leica RTC360 Ter-
restrial Laser Scanner (TLS) to scan the Math
and Blenheim sites and an (entry-level) Leica
BLK3603 to scan the ORI site. Views of these
maps are shown in the left section of Tab 1. TLS
scans are captured around 3 m apart for indoor
3https://leica-geosystems.com/products/laser-scanners
11

<!-- page 12 -->
ORI and 15 m to 20 m apart for outdoor Math and
Blenheim. Note that ultra-dense distance between
TLS scans is impractical due to the considerable
time required to scan and process point clouds.
Each Hesai lidar scan was registered to the
ground truth point cloud to obtain a 6 DoF pose.
We refer readers to our previous paper, where we
explain the details of the ground truth genera-
tion process in more detail [67], which we claim
achieves centimeter precision.
These point clouds were also used to render the
synthetic images for the point cloud map represen-
tation, as explained in Sec 3.4.1. Before rendering,
we voxel-filtered the ORI point cloud to 5 mm res-
olution and the Math and Blenheim clouds to
1 cm.
5 Experiment Results
5.1 Comparison of Rendered Images
First we present a set of illustrative examples of
rendered images obtained using the TLS point
cloud, NeRF, and mesh reconstruction pipelines.
Fig. 7 illustrates examples drawn from the three
datasets. Each pipeline has the ability to generate
reasonably lifelike synthetic images. However, we
note that each also exhibits distinct limitations.
For the indoor ORI dataset, object occlusion
and the relatively sparse coverage of the TLS
scanner results in some visible gaps in the point
cloud, leading to white regions in the rendered
images. Mesh reconstruction faces challenges in
accurately representing smaller objects or intri-
cate details, primarily due to the fixed size of
the triangular faces. This method is more suitable
for objects with planar surfaces than objects with
complex profiles. For example, the handrails are
difficult to reconstruct with a mesh, as shown in
(f). Conversely, NeRF demonstrates its superiority
in outdoor environments, successfully reconstruct-
ing fine details such as bicycle rails where mesh
reconstruction struggles, as shown in (b). How-
ever, NeRF often fails to capture intricate ground
floor patterns, as shown in (g) and (h), while
mesh reconstruction and point cloud techniques,
which employ direct image projection, can easily
accomplish this.
5.2 Full System Evaluation
In this section, we quantify the localization per-
formance of the three different rendering pipelines
using these synthesized images, benchmarking
performance against two entirely vision-based
localization systems (which use real images),
as detailed in Tab. 1. The systems we com-
pare are HLoc and COLMAP, both based on
Structure-from-Motion (SfM). We selected these
two methods for comparison because they are
widely adopted in the community and are designed
for large-scale real-world reconstructions. Once
the SfM step is completed, these methods allow
for real-time localization of query images.
Tab. 2 presents a high-level analysis of the suit-
ability of these systems for key robotics tasks. The
SfM approaches are non-metric, meaning their
pose estimates are not scaled to real-world dimen-
sions. This limitation necessitates other informa-
tion to be available to allow effective deployment
in robotic applications. These methods are also
not real-time, as the SfM bundle adjustment pro-
cess would take a couple of hours to a day,
depending on the image or map size.
In the following section, we will discuss the
configurations of HLoc and COLMAP in our
experiments and compare them with our methods
of localizing using point cloud, mesh, and NeRF-
based map representations. For a fair compari-
son, the primary performance metrics we use are
retrieval rate, the proportion of images correctly
retrieved as a percentage of the total number of
queried images, and localization rate, the propor-
tion of images correctly retrieved and localized
within a threshold as a percentage of the total
number of queried images. As we are evaluating
global localization systems, the threshold is within
1 m and 30◦of ground truth poses for indoors ORI.
For outdoor Blenheim and Math, the threshold is
within 2 m and 30◦.
5.2.1 Our Methods – Cloud, Mesh and
NeRF
For a fair comparison, we render an equal number
of images for each dataset at the same locations.
For ORI, render poses are 2 m apart, generating
130 images. Since Math and Blenheim cover larger
areas than ORI, render poses are 4 m apart, and
300 and 210 images were produced, respectively.
12

<!-- page 13 -->
Fig. 7: A comparison of rendered images from mesh, NeRF, and point cloud in Math (a-c), ORI (d-f),
and Blenheim (g-h).
When testing our approach of localizing with a
database of rendered images, we found consistent
performances for each of our three reconstruc-
tion techniques (point cloud, mesh, and NeRF)
across three distinct test locations. On average,
the localization rates for the point cloud and
mesh approaches were 56 % and 58 %, respectively,
while the NeRF-based approach achieved the best
performance at 72 %. The relatively lower local-
ization rates with point cloud and mesh systems
can be attributed to the projection of color and
textures from multiple camera views onto the 3D
space, occasionally resulting in occluded regions
and color inconsistencies.
Fig. 8 illustrates the performance of pose esti-
mation for query images localized in Math against
a NeRF-rendered image database. The ground
truth pose trajectory is drawn in blue, the esti-
mated poses in orange dots, and the estimated
poses that exceeded the threshold are highlighted
in purple.
The notable advantage of point cloud and
mesh mapping systems is their ability to gen-
erate color 3D maps online. The point cloud
13

<!-- page 14 -->
Table 1: Performance comparison of the different localization methods. (”DB size” is the number of
images in the database. ”Ret. Rate” refers to the retrieval rate. ”Loc. Rate” means the localization rate.
COLMAP (*) required all the images from all three cameras to reconstruct the prior map accurately for
the indoor ORI recording.)
Dataset
Method
DB Size
Ret. Rate
Loc. Rate
Sparse
130
N/A
Fail
HLoc
Dense
254
N/A
86
COLMAP
Dense
3020*
97
96*
Cloud
68
54
Mesh
81
61
ORI
Ours
NeRF
130
86
67
Sparse
503
N/A
20
HLoc
Dense
1019
N/A
39
COLMAP
Dense
1569
66
61
Cloud
89
56
Mesh
85
57
Math
Ours
NeRF
300
97
75
Sparse
210
N/A
42
HLoc
Dense
449
N/A
55
COLMAP
Dense
449
N/A
78
Cloud
77
57
Mesh
77
56
Blenheim
Ours
NeRF
210
86
73
Table 2: Comparative analysis of localization meth-
ods for use in different robotics tasks. ✓means
suitable, ✓
–
means partly suitable, and ✗means
unsuitable.
Method
Metric Pose
Real Time
Planning
HLoc
COLMAP
✓
–
✗
✓
–
Ours-Cloud
Ours-NeRF
Ours-Mesh
✓
✓
✓
and mesh results are available immediately fol-
lowing a SLAM run, making them useful for
real-time applications that cannot support render-
ing delays. Conversely, NeRF reconstruction offers
the most photorealistic rendering outcomes but
requires training after data collection. Addition-
ally, synthetic image generation with the NeRF
reconstruction is executed through an MLP infer-
ence step, which also requires a slightly longer
time (e.g. ∼1 s per image of resolution 720×540
on a Nvidia RTX 4090 GPU). In contrast, the
OpenGL-based rendering utilized in the point
cloud and mesh method takes a few milliseconds
per image.
20
40
60
80
100
m
60
50
40
30
20
10
0
m
Localisation Poses for Math
Ground Truth
Correct Poses
Incorrect Poses
Fig. 8: Estimated poses in Math from the NeRF
synthesized image database. The purple dots show
estimated poses exceeding the 2 m and 30◦thresh-
old compared to the ground truth poses.
5.2.2 HLoc
HLoc [1] is a 6 DoF visual localization toolkit. It
employs a hierarchical localization approach that
integrates image retrieval and feature-matching
techniques. We first configured HLoc to build an
SfM model using all real images and then used
it to register query images to the SfM model.
For an objective comparison, we used the same
14

<!-- page 15 -->
pre-trained networks as used in our localization
method — NetVLAD for image retrieval, Super-
Point for local feature detection, and SuperGlue
for feature matching.
For HLoc and COLMAP, the experiments
started with the same number of database images
as our system. We increased the number of images
until their performance improvement plateaued.
In general, visual localization systems require a
larger number of images to construct an accurate
SFM.
To obtain query image pose estimates (up to
the scale metric), we first refine the pose esti-
mates by eliminating any erroneous matches and
then use Evo4 to align the query image poses with
the ground truth poses to recover the scaling fac-
tor and the alignment transformation. Finally, we
apply this scaling factor to all estimated poses. We
can then calculate the localization rate.
During the initial SfM reconstruction step,
HLoc
performed
well
with
indoor
data
but
encountered difficulties in accurately construct-
ing the larger outdoor environments of Math and
Blenheim. We found that constructing a robust
SfM solution requires a dense set of images with
substantial overlap and minimal lighting changes.
For ORI, an image database of 130 images (as
used for map rendering pipelines) was insufficient
as the images were too sparse for the SfM solver
to achieve sufficient overlap. Increasing the num-
ber of images (to 254 and later 500) enabled the
creation of a complete reconstruction, albeit with
some observable drift in the staircases connect-
ing the two floors of the building. For MATH, the
best results were achieved with 1019 images, and
increasing the database (to 2040 images) did not
noticeably improve the SfM model. Lastly, for
Blenheim, HLoc achieved its best performance
with 449 images, and doubling the image count
did not improve the overall SFM accuracy.
Overall, HLoc worked well in the indoor set-
ting, but the reconstruction was less successful in
large outdoor scenes.
5.2.3 COLMAP
This system [11] is a widely-used SfM and
Multi-View Stereo pipeline with graphical and
command-line interfaces. It can construct visual
4https://github.com/MichaelGrupp/evo
maps using ordered and unordered image collec-
tions. In our experiments, we adopted the recom-
mended approach of utilizing SIFT as the feature
detector and a vocabulary tree for image retrieval.
Our results show that COLMAP requires a higher
number of database images than HLoc. It achieves
its best performance when incorporating images
from the three cameras of the Frontier (front, left,
and right facing) within the dataset. This was par-
ticularly the case for the indoor ORI dataset, where
the camera motion is more abrupt/jerky. For ORI,
COLMAP required all images from all three cam-
eras — facing left, forward, and right, a total of
3020 images.
Once the SfM solution is accurately estimated,
localizing new images is straightforward, espe-
cially if a query image closely resembles the
database images. For MATH, the query and map
images were captured in quite different light-
ing conditions. Hence, the performance of image
retrieval is lower with COLMAP as it uses
the non-learning-based image retrieval method.
Across all three locations, COLMAP gave good
localization performance, but constructing the
SFM solution takes double the amount of time
compared to HLoc, e.g., for MATH, COLMAP takes
around 4.5 hours with 1569 images, and HLoc
takes 2 hours for 1019 images.
5.3 Image Descriptor, Feature
Detector and Matcher
For a fair comparison, we adopted the same
image descriptor and feature detector methods as
HLoc. We also experimented with image descrip-
tors such as EigenPlaces [19] and MixVPR [20],
but NetVLAD marginally outperformed them
when tested on real query images and synthetic
database images. A more detailed ablation study
comparing learning-based and non-learning-based
feature detectors and matchers is provided in Sec.
5.6. It is important to note that our approach
is not dependent on the specific learning-based
detector and matcher — which can be swapped
for improved methods as they emerge. The key
point here is that by sampling a database of syn-
thetic images, we can leverage dense 3D maps
to provide a unified representation across differ-
ent map types. This approach offers flexibility in
generating poses within the 3D map and even
allows for an iterative ”render and compare”
15

<!-- page 16 -->
(a) HLoc map: Although the SfM reconstruction is
accurate, only four camera views could be correctly
localized around the bend.
(b) Mesh map: 30 out of 90 query images could be
correctly localized.
Fig. 9: Localizing when traveling in a direction
opposite to the mapping phase. The mapping
direction (blue) is from 1 to 2, and the query
direction (green) is from 2 to 1. Orange triangles
represent the localized camera view results.
strategy if needed, while also reducing the num-
ber of database images requires, as compared to
SfM-based approaches.
5.4 Localization in Directions
Unseen during Mapping
Our method has the powerful capability of gen-
erating images from any viewpoint. This is very
useful when attempting to localize when travel-
ing in directions opposite to that used to create
the map. For instance, in the scenario where the
map is constructed by traversing from left to right,
as shown in Fig. 9, we can synthesize images
from all four orthogonal directions. This capability
facilitates localization even when traveling in the
reverse direction, a challenge often encountered
in conventional visual localization methodologies,
which typically requires storing images from both
travel directions in the database.
The initial recording was used to reconstruct
a mapping database with only the front-facing
camera, as shown in Fig. 9a. The map was gener-
ated by traversing from point 1 to point 2, where
98 images were captured (illustrated in blue).
We then attempted to localize to the map dur-
ing a reverse traversal from points 2 to 1, with
the results depicted using orange-colored cam-
era views. Of the 87 query images, only 4 were
successfully localized (when turning around the
corner) due to minimal overlap in the image views.
A similar pattern was observed with COLMAP
where it failed to localize any query images even
though the localization module had an accurate
SfM reconstruction. HLoc performed marginally
better than COLMAP due to its learning-based
feature matching approach.
NeRF generated blurrier images from reverse
perspectives when trained exclusively with front-
facing camera images, resulting in suboptimal
localization performance. This issue is likely
caused by insufficient training views when the
path involves walking in a straight line. In
contrast, the mesh-based pipeline demonstrated
strong performance in this scenario. Mesh could
effectively generate rendered images facing in the
un-mapped direction (albeit with imperfections
resulting in holes in the rendered images). Despite
these visual limitations, mesh-rendered images
achieved a localization rate of approximately 33 %.
In a second experiment, we expanded the
mapping database to include images from two
cameras, the side and front camera. As expected,
this enhanced the performance for COLMAP
and HLoc, with side camera views available for
reverse image matching. NeRF exhibited much
better localization performance, matching 75% of
the images. Note that the mesh reconstruction
implementation only works with one camera.
To provide a broader comparison, we show
that point clouds captured with an omnidirec-
tional camera (both front and backward facing)
can achieve a very high localization rate.
To conclude, this section demonstrates that
our system can generate synthetic images in novel
views, which aids the localization in a direction
that is unseen during the mapping. In particular,
mesh-based map representation can render images
for localization even when there are very limited
16

<!-- page 17 -->
Table 3: Localization when traveling in the opposite direction to the mapping trajectory with novel view
synthesis.
Method
Camera
Images
Ret. Rate %
Loc. Rate %
COLMAP
front
98
N/A
0
HLoc
front
98
N/A
4
NeRF
front
30
10
7
Mesh
front
30
37
33
COLMAP
front + side
196
N/A
26
HLoc
front + side
196
N/A
39
NeRF
front + side
30
88
75
Mesh
front + side
-
-
-
Point Cloud
omni
30
98
88
(a) Scenes in the original maps.
(b) Changes after three months.
Fig. 10: Ablation study: assessing changes in Math and ORI 2-3 months apart. The top row displays
images from the original dataset, while the bottom row shows corresponding images captured months
later which reflect the typical movement of objects within the scene. The images on the right-half are
from Math, while the bottom right ones were captured on a dark day. Please note that some images have
been brightened for easier interpretation here.
views of the environment, while NeRF can ren-
der better images for localization with a moderate
number of views.
5.5 Ablation Study: Changes in
Environment
When using a prior map for localization, one
would expect that changes to the scene would
affect algorithm performance. In indoor environ-
ments, furniture and decorations are often recon-
figured. Meanwhile, outdoor environments are
affected by seasonal and lighting changes, while
dynamic objects such as parked cars or bicycles
may be added or removed. Our method must be
resilient to such changes.
17

<!-- page 18 -->
Table 4: Localization performance amid scene changes in prior maps.
Image Source
Dataset
Time
Ret. Rate
Loc. Rate
Point Cloud
ORI
Original
68
54
3 Months later
70
48
NeRF
Math
Original
97
75
2 Months later
91
51
Mesh
Math
Original
85
56
2 Months later
85
49
Table 5: Average performance of different feature detector combinations for matching a set of ten real
and synthetic image pairs. An example is shown in Fig. 11. Note that many of the features matched for
Akaze and SIFT are incorrect.
Method
Feature Detected
Matched
Akaze [68] + NN
410
18
SIFT [21] + KNN
841
21
R2D2 [23] + NN
1024
69
D2Net [69] + NN
2932
132
SuperPoint [22] + SuperGlue [61]
1024
201
To demonstrate the robustness of our approach
to scene change, we tested our camera localization
system with data collected 2-3 months after the
initial construction of the maps. The right-hand
side of Fig. 10 shows two images from MATH with
changes (shown with red circles) in the vegetation
color, the location of parked cars, and the configu-
ration of the bicycle stand. On the left-hand side,
images from ORI show rearranged furniture and
equipment.
In both locations, lighting variation between
the 2-3 month period was clearly observed. The
detailed results of localization performance are
presented in Tab. 4. All three map representa-
tions show a small drop in retrieval and location
rates. However, they can still localize around 50 %
of query images, demonstrating the robustness
of matching against one unified synthetic image
database, aided by learning-based visual feature
detector SuperPoint and matcher SuperGlue.
5.6 Ablation Study: Feature
Detection and Matching
As shown in Fig. 7, there is a significant reality
gap between images captured by real cameras and
synthetically rendered images. Each map repre-
sentation has its own limitations when rendering
the synthetic images. Images rendered from TLS
point clouds often lack photorealism, exhibit a sur-
real quality, and have visible gaps corresponding
to unscanned regions. Conversely, mesh-rendered
images can contain areas with fragmented recon-
struction and struggle to faithfully represent small
and intricate geometric structures. For the NeRF-
generated images, when the rendering poses differ
largely from the training data viewpoints, one
can often see a fog-like effect in the generated
images. Perhaps learning-based feature detectors
and matching techniques could help to bridge the
domain gap between synthetic and real images and
alleviate these issues.
In this section, we conduct a comparative anal-
ysis of different feature detectors and matchers
using a representative dataset of ten image pairs
drawn from across the three datasets. One image
is a live camera image, and the other is a rendered
image from either the point cloud, mesh, or NeRF
pipelines. Fig. 11 shows one scene with common
challenges: vegetation, low-textured ground, and
thin bike rails. Fig. 11c shows how learning-based
approaches such as SuperPoint and SuperGlue can
effectively identify and match numerous correct
18

<!-- page 19 -->
(a) Detector: OpenCV Akaze, Matcher: Nearest
Neighbor
(b) Detector: OpenCV SIFT, Matcher: Flann
KNN
(c) Detector: SuperPoint, Matcher: SuperGlue
Fig. 11: Example of matching a camera image
to a NeRF rendered image with different feature
detectors.
features. In contrast, traditional feature detectors
like Akaze (Fig. 11a) and SIFT (Fig. 11b) perform
poorly in this scenario.
Tab. 5 presents quantitative results for this
test, comparing several learning-based and clas-
sic feature detection and matching techniques.
Among
the
learning-based
feature
detectors,
SuperPoint, R2D2, and D2Net show promising
performance by matching many features. How-
ever, traditional methods like SIFT and Akaze
match fewer features, many of which are incor-
rect. Note that R2D2 produces descriptors of size
128, and D2Net generates descriptors of size 512.
Given that the SuperGlue matcher is pre-trained
with descriptors of size 256, we use the Nearest
Neighbour (NN) matcher with a ratio thresh-
old test for R2D2 and D2Net. SuperPoint and
R2D2 are capped at 1024 features, while D2Net,
a dense image feature extractor, naturally yields
more feature points.
In summary, leveraging learning-based fea-
ture detectors and matching techniques is crucial
to mitigate the domain gap between camera-
captured and synthetic images, enabling robust
feature detection and matching across diverse
image representations.
6 Conclusions and Future
Work
6.1 Conclusions
Using readily available 3D color maps generated
from SLAM missions or TLS scanners, we can
repurpose these maps for localization tasks. In
this paper, we introduce a localization system
specifically designed to localize a single camera
image within 3D color maps by sampling and
generating a synthetic image database. We first
demonstrated a pipeline to construct 3D prior
maps using three distinct representations: point
clouds, meshes, and NeRF. Each representation is
then used to synthesize RGB and depth images.
Following this, we proposed a strategy to define
the set of rendering poses that optimize the cre-
ation of a representative 3D map while retaining a
minimal set of database images. The visual local-
ization pipeline can estimate the camera pose of
a query image through a retrieval and match-
ing process, leveraging learning-based descriptors
and feature detectors. We conducted a compre-
hensive analysis of localization performance across
these representations and discussed their respec-
tive merits. Additionally, we offered a benchmark
comparison with two purely vision-based localiza-
tion systems to situate our results within the wider
field of visual localization. Notably, both point
cloud and mesh representations achieve a localiza-
tion accuracy of 55 % for query images, while the
NeRF representation surpasses these, achieving a
localization rate of 72 %.
6.2 Limitation and Future Work
6.2.1 Scene Change
While we have studied the effect of scene changes
within the context of a 3D color map, we acknowl-
edge that there would likely be a performance
decrease during gradual scene transitions over a
19

<!-- page 20 -->
period of months and years. In future research,
we aim to devise a detection algorithm capa-
ble of promptly identifying these changes in real
time, thus facilitating the identification of out-of-
date regions of the map. Additionally, in scenarios
where the device is equipped with a lidar sensor,
we propose to update the existing map follow-
ing a remapping process to ensure its continued
accuracy and relevance.
6.2.2 Synthetic Image
All three map representations encounter specific
challenges in accurately rendering scenes with
minimal texture details. This difficulty is partic-
ularly notable in 3D mapping and reconstruc-
tion, where effectively capturing the RGB texture
details of ground and vegetation proves challeng-
ing. Furthermore, during the online localization
of our system, images that predominantly con-
tain low-texture objects often yield insufficient
features for matching, resulting in inaccurate pose
estimations. To address this, we could prune
the database images during online localization to
retain only the most useful images and synthesiz-
ing new ones on-the-fly as needed.
References
[1] Sarlin, P.-E., Cadena, C., Siegwart, R., Dym-
czyk, M.: From Coarse to Fine: Robust
hierarchical localization at large scale. In:
IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR) (2019). https://
doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2019.01300
[2] Sattler, T., Leibe, B., Kobbelt, L.: Effi-
cient & effective prioritized matching for
large-scale image-based localization. IEEE
Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell. 39(9),
1744–1756 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1109/
TPAMI.2016.2611662
[3] Zeisl, B., Sattler, T., Pollefeys, M.: Camera
pose voting for large-scale image-based local-
ization. In: Intl. Conf. on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pp. 2704–2712 (2015). https://doi.
org/10.1109/ICCV.2015.310
[4] Kim, G., Kim, A.: Scan Context: Egocen-
tric spatial descriptor for place recognition
within 3D point cloud map. In: IEEE/RSJ
Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Sys-
tems (IROS), pp. 4802–4809 (2018). https:
//doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2018.8593953
[5] Vidanapathirana,
K.,
Ramezani,
M.,
Moghadam, P., Sridharan, S., Fookes, C.:
LoGG3D-Net: Locally guided global descrip-
tor learning for 3D place recognition. In:
IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), pp. 2215–2221 (2022). https://
doi.org/10.1109/ICRA46639.2022.9811753
[6] Uy, M.A., Lee, G.H.: PointNetVLAD: Deep
point cloud based retrieval for large-scale
place
recognition.
In:
IEEE
Intl.
Conf.
Computer
Vision
and
Pattern
Recogni-
tion
(CVPR)
(2018).
https://doi.org/10.
1109/CVPR.2018.00470
[7] Wolcott, R.W., Eustice, R.M.: Visual local-
ization within lidar maps for automated
urban driving. In: IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf.
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS),
pp. 176–183 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IROS.2014.6942558
[8] Pascoe, G., Maddern, W., Newman, P.:
Direct visual localisation and calibration for
road vehicles in changing city environments.
In: IEEE Intl. Conf. on Computer Vision
Workshop (ICCVW), pp. 98–105 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCVW.2015.23
[9] Gehring,
C.,
Fankhauser,
P.,
Isler,
L.,
Diethelm, R., Bachmann, S., Potz, M., Ger-
stenberg, L., Hutter, M.: ANYmal in the
Field: Solving industrial inspection of an
offshore hvdc platform with a quadrupedal
robot. In: Field and Service Robotics, pp.
247–260. Springer, Singapore (2021). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/978-981-15-9460-1 18
[10] Besl, P.J., McKay, N.D.: A method for reg-
istration of 3D shapes. IEEE Trans. Pattern
Anal. Mach. Intell. 14(2), 239–256 (1992)
https://doi.org/10.1109/34.121791
[11] Sch¨onberger, J.L., Frahm, J.-M.: Structure-
from-motion revisited. In: IEEE Intl. Conf.
Computer
Vision
and
Pattern
Recogni-
tion
(CVPR)
(2016).
https://doi.org/10.
1109/CVPR.2016.445
20

<!-- page 21 -->
[12] Yin, H., Lin, Z., Yeoh, J.K.W.: Semantic
localization on BIM-generated maps using a
3D lidar sensor. Automation in Construction
146, 104641 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.autcon.2022.104641
[13] Liu, J., Nie, Q., Liu, Y., Wang, C.: NeRF-
Loc: Visual localization with conditional
neural radiance field. In: IEEE Intl. Conf.
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
9385–9392 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/
ICRA48891.2023.10161420
[14] Matsuki,
H.,
Murai,
R.,
Kelly,
P.H.J.,
Davison,
A.J.:
Gaussian
splatting
SLAM.
In:
IEEE
Intl.
Conf.
Com-
puter
Vision
and
Pattern
Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 18039–18048 (2024). https:
//doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52733.2024.01708
[15] Cummins,
M.,
Newman,
P.:
FAB-MAP:
Probabilistic localization and mapping in
the space of appearance. Intl. J. of Robot.
Res. 27(6), 647–665 (2008) https://doi.org/
10.1177/0278364908090961
[16] Galvez-L´opez, D., Tardos, J.D.: Bags of
binary
words
for
fast
place
recognition
in image sequences. IEEE Trans. Robotics
28(5), 1188–1197 (2012) https://doi.org/10.
1109/TRO.2012.2197158
[17] Arandjelovi´c,
R.,
Gronat,
P.,
Torii,
A.,
Pajdla, T., Sivic, J.: NetVLAD: CNN archi-
tecture for weakly supervised place recogni-
tion. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal. Mach. Intell.
40(6), 1437–1451 (2018) https://doi.org/10.
1109/TPAMI.2017.2711011
[18] Hausler, S., Garg, S., Xu, M., Milford,
M., Fischer, T.: Patch-NetVLAD: Multi-scale
fusion of locally-global descriptors for place
recognition. In: IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pp. 14141–14152 (2021). https://doi.org/10.
1109/CVPR46437.2021.01392
[19] Berton,
G.,
Trivigno,
G.,
Caputo,
B.,
Masone, C.: EigenPlaces: Training viewpoint
robust models for visual place recognition. In:
IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 11080–11090
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICCV51070.
2023.01017
[20] Ali-bey, A., Chaib-draa, B., Gigu`ere, P.:
MixVPR: Feature mixing for visual place
recognition. In: IEEE/CVF Winter Conf. on
Applications of Computer Vision, pp. 2998–
3007 (2023)
[21] Lowe, D.G.: Distinctive image features from
scale-invariant keypoints. Intl. J. of Com-
puter Vision 60, 91–110 (2004) https://doi.
org/10.1023/B:VISI.0000029664.99615.94
[22] DeTone, D., Malisiewicz, T., Rabinovich,
A.:
SuperPoint:
Self-supervised
inter-
est
point
detection
and
description.
In:
IEEE
Intl.
Conf.
Computer
Vision
and
Pattern
Recognition
Workshops
(CVPRW),
pp.
224–236
(2018).
https:
//doi.org/10.1109/CVPRW.2018.00060
[23] Revaud, J., Weinzaepfel, P., Souza, C.R.,
Humenberger, M.: R2D2: Repeatable and
reliable detector and descriptor. In: Intl.
Conf. on Neural Information Processing Sys-
tems (NeurIPS). Curran Associates Inc., Red
Hook, NY, USA (2019)
[24] Panek,
V.,
Kukelova,
Z.,
Sattler,
T.:
MeshLoc:
Mesh-based
visual
localiza-
tion. In: Eur. Conf. on Computer Vision
(ECCV)
(2022).
https://doi.org/10.1007/
978-3-031-20047-2 34
[25] Xue, F., Budvytis, I., Reino, D.O., Cipolla,
R.: Efficient large-scale localization by global
instance recognition. In: IEEE Intl. Conf.
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 17327–17336 (2022). https://
doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01683
[26] Trivigno, G., Masone, C., Caputo, B., Sat-
tler,
T.:
The
Unreasonable
Effectiveness
of Pre-Trained Features for Camera Pose
Refinement
(2024).
https://arxiv.org/abs/
2404.10438
[27] Zhang, Z., Sattler, T., Scaramuzza, D.: Ref-
erence pose generation for long-term visual
localization via learned features and view
synthesis. ijcv 129(4), 821–844 (2021) https:
21

<!-- page 22 -->
//doi.org/10.1007/s11263-020-01399-8
[28] Himstedt, M., Frost, J., Hellbach, S., B¨ohme,
H.-J., Maehle, E.: Large scale place recogni-
tion in 2D lidar scans using geometrical land-
mark relations. In: IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
5030–5035 (2014). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IROS.2014.6943277
[29] He, L., Wang, X., Zhang, H.: M2DP: A novel
3D point cloud descriptor and its applica-
tion in loop closure detection. In: IEEE/RSJ
Intl. Conf. on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 231–237 (2016). https://doi.org/
10.1109/IROS.2016.7759060
[30] Kong, X., Yang, X., Zhai, G., Zhao, X., Zeng,
X., Wang, M., Liu, Y., Li, W., Wen, F.:
Semantic graph based place recognition for
3D point clouds. In: IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp.
8216–8223 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1109/
IROS45743.2020.9341060
[31] Dub´e, R., Cramariuc, A., Dugas, D., Som-
mer, H., Dymczyk, M., Nieto, J., Siegwart,
R.,
Cadena,
C.:
Segmap:
Segment-based
mapping and localization using data-driven
descriptors. Intl. J. of Robot. Res. 39(2-
3), 339–355 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1177/
0278364919863090
[32] Vidanapathirana, K., Moghadam, P., Har-
wood, B., Zhao, M., Sridharan, S., Fookes, C.:
Locus: Lidar-based place recognition using
spatiotemporal
higher-order
pooling.
In:
IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), pp. 5075–5081 (2020). https://
doi.org/10.1109/ICRA48506.2021.9560915
[33] Zhang, L., Tejaswi Digumarti, S., Tinchev,
G., Fallon, M.: InstaLoc: One-shot global
lidar localisation in indoor environments
through instance learning. In: Robotics: Sci-
ence and Systems (RSS) (2023). https://doi.
org/10.15607/RSS.2023.XIX.070
[34] Ratz, S., Dymczyk, M., Siegwart, R.Y., Dub´e,
R.: OneShot Global Localization: Instant
lidar-visual pose estimation. In: IEEE Intl.
Conf. on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 5415–5421 (2020). https://doi.org/10.
1109/ICRA40945.2020.9197458
[35] Bernreiter,
L.,
Ott,
L.,
Nieto,
J.,
Sieg-
wart, R., Cadena, C.: Spherical multi-modal
place recognition for heterogeneous sensor
systems. In: IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics
and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 1743–1750
(2021). https://doi.org/10.1109/ICRA48506.
2021.9561078 . IEEE
[36] Lai, H., Yin, P., Scherer, S.: AdaFusion:
Visual-lidar fusion with adaptive weights for
place recognition. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett.
(RA-L) 7(4), 12038–12045 (2022) https://
doi.org/10.1109/LRA.2022.3210880
[37] Lee, A.J., Song, S., Lim, H., Lee, W., Myung,
H.: (LC)2: Lidar-camera loop constraints for
cross-modal place recognition. IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett. (RA-L) 8(6) (2023) https://doi.
org/10.1109/LRA.2023.3268848
[38] Borges, P., Zlot, R., Bosse, M., Nuske,
S.,
Tews,
A.:
Vision-based
localization
using
an
edge
map
extracted
from
3D
laser
range
data.
In:
IEEE
Intl.
Conf.
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp.
4902–4909 (2010). https://doi.org/10.1109/
ROBOT.2010.5509517
[39] Yu, H., Zhen, W., Yang, W., Zhang, J.,
Scherer, S.: Monocular camera localization
in prior lidar maps with 2D-3D line corre-
spondences. IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on Intelli-
gent Robots and Systems (IROS), 4588–4594
(2020) https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS45743.
2020.9341690
[40] Zuo, X., Ye, W., Yang, Y., Zheng, R., Vidal-
Calleja, T., Huang, G., Liu, Y.: Multimodal
localization: Stereo over LiDAR map. J. Field
Robot. 37(6), 1003–1026 (2020) https://doi.
org/10.1002/ROB.21936
[41] Liang, S., Zhang, Y., Tian, R., Zhu, D.,
Yang, L., Cao, Z.: SemLoc: Accurate and
robust visual localization with semantic and
structural constraints from prior maps. In:
IEEE Intl. Conf. on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), pp. 4135–4141 (2022). https://
doi.org/10.1109/ICRA46639.2022.9811925
22

<!-- page 23 -->
[42] Xu, W., Cai, Y., He, D., Lin, J., Zhang, F.:
FAST-LIO2: Fast direct lidar-inertial odom-
etry. IEEE Trans. Robotics 38(4), 2053–
2073 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.
2022.3141876
[43] Zhou, Q.-Y., Park, J., Koltun, V.: Open3D:
A modern library for 3D data processing.
arXiv:1801.09847 (2018) https://doi.org/10.
48550/ARXIV.1801.09847
[44] Arvo, J.: Graphics Gems II. Morgan Kauf-
mann Publishers Inc., San Francisco, CA,
USA (1991)
[45] Botsch, M., Kobbelt, L., Pauly, M., Alliez,
P., L´evy, B.: Polygon Mesh Processing. A K
Peters, Natick, Massachusetts (2010). https:
//doi.org/10.1201/b10688
[46] Lin, J., Yuan, C., Cai, Y., Li, H., Ren,
Y., Zou, Y., Hong, X., Zhang, F.: ImMesh:
An immediate lidar localization and mesh-
ing framework. IEEE Trans. Robotics (2023)
https://doi.org/10.1109/TRO.2023.3321227
[47] Lin,
J.,
Zhang,
F.:
R3LIVE++:
a
robust,
real-time,
radiance
reconstruction
package
with
a
tightly-coupled
lidar-
inertial-visual
state
estimator.
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2209.03666
(2022)
https:
//doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2209.03666
[48] Mildenhall, B., Srinivasan, P.P., Tancik, M.,
Barron, J.T., Ramamoorthi, R., Ng, R.: Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields
for view synthesis. In: Eur. Conf. on Com-
puter Vision (ECCV) (2020). https://doi.
org/10.1007/978-3-030-58452-8 24
[49] Max, N.: Optical models for direct vol-
ume rendering. IEEE Trans. on Visualization
and Computer Graphics 1(2), 99–108 (1995)
https://doi.org/10.1109/2945.468400
[50] Kajiya, J.T., Von Herzen, B.P.: Ray tracing
volume densities. SIGGRAPH 18(3), 165–
174 (1984) https://doi.org/10.1145/800031.
808594
[51] Fridovich-Keil,
S.,
Yu,
A.,
Tancik,
M.,
Chen, Q., Recht, B., Kanazawa, A.: Plenox-
els:
Radiance
fields
without
neural
net-
works.
In:
IEEE
Intl.
Conf.
Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp.
5501–5510 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1109/
CVPR52688.2022.00542
[52] M¨uller, T., Evans, A., Schied, C., Keller,
A.: Instant neural graphics primitives with
a multiresolution hash encoding. In: SIG-
GRAPH
(2022).
https://doi.org/10.1145/
3528223.3530127
[53] Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimk¨uhler, T., Dret-
takis, G.: 3D Gaussian splatting for real-
time radiance field rendering. ACM Trans.
on Graphics 42(4) (2023) https://doi.org/10.
1145/3592433
[54] Tancik, M., Weber, E., Ng, E., Li, R., Yi,
B., Wang, T., Kristoffersen, A., Austin, J.,
Salahi, K., Ahuja, A., et al.: Nerfstudio: A
modular framework for neural radiance field
development. In: SIGGRAPH (2023). https:
//doi.org/10.1145/3588432.3591516
[55] Barron, J.T., Mildenhall, B., Verbin, D.,
Srinivasan, P.P., Hedman, P.: Mip-NeRF
360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance
fields. IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2022) https:
//doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.00539
[56] Martin-Brualla, R., Radwan, N., Sajjadi,
M.S.M., Barron, J.T., Dosovitskiy, A., Duck-
worth, D.: NeRF in the Wild: Neural radiance
fields for unconstrained photo collections. In:
IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR) (2021). https://
doi.org/10.1109/CVPR46437.2021.00713
[57] Tao, Y., Bhalgat, Y., Fu, L.F.T., Matta-
mala, M., Chebrolu, N., Fallon, M.: SiLVR:
Scalable lidar-visual reconstruction with neu-
ral radiance fields for robotic inspection.
In:
IEEE
Intl.
Conf.
on
Robotics
and
Automation (ICRA) (2024). https://doi.org/
10.1109/ICRA57147.2024.10611278
[58] Deng, K., Liu, A., Zhu, J.-Y., Ramanan,
D.: Depth-supervised nerf: Fewer views and
faster training for free. In: IEEE Intl. Conf.
23

<!-- page 24 -->
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 12882–12891 (2022). https://
doi.org/10.1109/CVPR52688.2022.01254
[59] Yu, Z., Peng, S., Niemeyer, M., Sattler, T.,
Geiger, A.: MonoSDF: Exploring monocu-
lar geometric cues for neural implicit sur-
face reconstruction. Intl. Conf. on Neural
Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
(2022)
[60] Von
Luxburg,
U.:
A
tutorial
on
spec-
tral clustering. Statistics and Computing
17, 395–416 (2007) https://doi.org/10.1007/
S11222-007-9033-Z
[61] Sarlin, P.-E., DeTone, D., Malisiewicz, T.,
Rabinovich, A.: SuperGlue: Learning fea-
ture matching with graph neuralnetworks.
In: IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2020). https:
//doi.org/10.1109/CVPR42600.2020.00499
[62] Marchand, E., Uchiyama, H., Spindler, F.:
Pose estimation for augmented reality: A
hands-on survey. IEEE Trans. on Visualiza-
tion and Computer Graphics 22(12), 2633–
2651 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1109/TVCG.
2015.2513408
[63] Torii, A., Sivic, J., Okutomi, M., Pajdla,
T.: Visual place recognition with repeti-
tive structures. IEEE Trans. Pattern Anal.
Mach. Intell. (2015) https://doi.org/10.1109/
TPAMI.2015.2409868
[64] Dai, A., Chang, A.X., Savva, M., Halber,
M., Funkhouser, T., Nießner, M.: Scan-
Net: Richly-annotated 3D reconstructions of
indoor scenes. In: IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR)
(2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2017.
261
[65] Li, Z., Snavely, N.: Megadepth: Learning
single-view depth prediction from internet
photos. In: IEEE Intl. Conf. Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR) (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1109/CVPR.2018.00218
[66] Fu,
L.F.T.,
Chebrolu,
N.,
Fallon,
M.:
Extrinsic
calibration
of
camera
to
lidar
using a differentiable checkerboard model.
In:
IEEE/RSJ
Intl.
Conf.
on
Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1825–1831
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS55552.
2023.10341781
[67] Zhang, L., Camurri, M., Wisth, D., Fal-
lon,
M.:
Multi-Camera
LiDAR
Inertial
Extension to the Newer College Dataset.
arXiv:2112.08854 (2021) https://doi.org/10.
48550/ARXIV.2112.08854
[68] Alcantarilla, P.F., Nuevo, J., Bartoli, A.: Fast
explicit diffusion for accelerated features in
nonlinear scale spaces. In: British Machine
Vision Conf. (BMVC) (2013). https://doi.
org/10.5244/C.27.13
[69] Dusmanu, M., Rocco, I., Pajdla, T., Polle-
feys, M., Sivic, J., Torii, A., Sattler, T.: D2-
Net: A trainable cnn for joint detection and
description of local features. In: IEEE Intl.
Conf. Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition (CVPR) (2019). https://doi.org/10.
1109/CVPR.2019.00828
24
