<!-- page 1 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
Robust Gaussian Splatting SLAM by Leveraging
Loop Closure
Zunjie Zhu, Youxu Fang, Xin Li, Chengang Yan, Feng Xu, Chau Yuen, Fellow, IEEE, Yanyan Li
Abstract‚Äî3D Gaussian Splatting algorithms excel in novel
view rendering applications and have been adapted to extend
the capabilities of traditional SLAM systems. However, current
Gaussian Splatting SLAM methods, designed mainly for hand-
held RGB or RGB-D sensors, struggle with tracking drifts
when used with rotating RGB-D camera setups. In this paper,
we propose a robust Gaussian Splatting SLAM architecture
that utilizes inputs from rotating multiple RGB-D cameras
to achieve accurate localization and photorealistic rendering
performance. The carefully designed Gaussian Splatting Loop
Closure module effectively addresses the issue of accumulated
tracking and mapping errors found in conventional Gaussian
Splatting SLAM systems. First, each Gaussian is associated with
an anchor frame and categorized as historical or novel based on
its timestamp. By rendering different types of Gaussians at the
same viewpoint, the proposed loop detection strategy considers
both co-visibility relationships and distinct rendering outcomes.
Furthermore, a loop closure optimization approach is proposed
to remove camera pose drift and maintain the high quality
of 3D Gaussian models. The approach uses a lightweight pose
graph optimization algorithm to correct pose drift and updates
Gaussians based on the optimized poses. Additionally, a bundle
adjustment scheme further refines camera poses using photomet-
ric and geometric constraints, ultimately enhancing the global
consistency of scenarios. Quantitative and qualitative evaluations
on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate that our
method outperforms state-of-the-art methods in camera pose
estimation and novel view rendering tasks. The code will be open-
sourced for the community.
Index Terms‚ÄîGaussian Splatting SLAM, Loop Closure, Mul-
tisensor Systems, Global Optimization.
I. INTRODUCTION
S
IMULTANEOUS localization and mapping (SLAM) is a
foundational technology in robotics and computer vision,
enabling smart robots to navigate and understand their envi-
ronments by reconstructing a map and simultaneously local-
izing themselves within it. Although general SLAM systems
utilizing monocular [1], [2], stereo [3], [4], RGB-D [5], [6],
and visual-inertial [7], [8] sensors have shown impressive
Z. Zhu and Y. Fang are with the School of Communication Engineering,
Hangzhou Dianzi University, Hangzhou, China. Z. Zhu and Y. Fang are also
with the Lishui Institute of Hangzhou Dianzi University. E-mail: {zunjiezhu,
fangyouxu}@hdu.edu.cn.
C. Yan is with the School of Automation, Hangzhou Dianzi University,
Hangzhou, China. C. Yan is also with the Faculty of Applied Sciences, Macao
Polytechnic University, Macao, China. E-mail: cgyan@hdu.edu.cn.
X. Li and C. Yuen are with School of Electrical and Electronics
Engineering, Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. E-mail: {li-x,
chau.yuen}@ntu.edu.sg.
F. Xu is with the BNRist and School of Software, Tsinghua University,
Beijing, China. E-mail: feng-xu@tsinghua.edu.cn.
Y. Li is with the Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany. Y. Li
is the corresponding author. E-mail: yanyan.li@tum.de.
w/o Loop
Loop
Fig. 1: Example of loop closure optimization: A comparison
of our method without loop optimization (left) and with loop
optimization (right) on 3D Gaussian ellipsoid visualization
(top) and novel view rendering (bottom).
performance in camera pose tracking and 3D reconstruction,
they face challenges in rendering novel photorealistic images
that are crucial for advancing further intelligence applications.
To enhance the novel view rendering capabilities of SLAM
systems, neural radiance fields [9] using a single Multi-
Layer Perceptron (MLP) as a scene representation have been
integrated into conventional tracking and mapping methods
to build NeRF-SLAM [10], [11]. In pursuit of rendering
efficiency and quality, point-based explicit representations,
such as 3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) algorithms, including 3D-
GS [12], 2D-GS [13], and Gaussian surfel [14], are employed
in novel view synthesis tasks. Through the process of GS
optimization, camera poses and 3D Gaussians are incremen-
tally estimated in GS-based SLAM systems [15], [16]. Unlike
traditional SLAM approaches that typically rely on features
for camera pose tracking, GS-based SLAM methods fix the
parameters of 3D Gaussians and optimize the camera poses
of the current frame by rendering Gaussians to images to
compute photometric [12] and geometric [17] residuals be-
tween observed and rendered images. However, these GS-
based SLAM systems still face challenges, such as camera
drift during the tracking process, despite the implementation
of bundle adjustment modules to refine the 3D Gaussians and
keyframe camera poses. Moreover, these algorithms are pri-
marily designed for traditional handheld sensor setups, which
limits their applicability in more advanced SLAM systems,
arXiv:2409.20111v1  [cs.RO]  30 Sep 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
particularly those involving rotating devices [18] with multiple
RGB-D cameras.
In this paper, we introduce a robust Gaussian Splatting
SLAM architecture designed to address typical degradation
problems in pose estimation and scene synthesis using rotated
multiple RGB-D cameras. By integrating a novel GS-based
loop closure module which includes both loop detection and
drift removal strategies, our system achieves accurate camera
localization and photo-realistic view rendering performance.
First, each Gaussian is associated with an anchor frame based
on its generation timestamp. By categorizing 3D Gaussians
into history and novel groups based on timestamps, we propose
a novel loop detection strategy that leverages both the number
of co-visible observations and the rendering distances of
different Gaussians. Furthermore, we introduce a loop closure
optimization approach to address camera pose drift and pre-
serve the high quality of 3D Gaussian models. This approach
employs a lightweight pose graph optimization module to
correct pose drift and updates Gaussians based on the refined
poses of their anchor frames. Additionally, a bundle adjustment
scheme further optimizes camera poses using photometric and
geometric constraints to achieve global consistency between
viewpoints and 3D Gaussians. The contributions of this work
are summarized as follows:
1) We categorize 3D Gaussians into novel and history
groups based on their generation timestamps, leveraging
this classification for enhanced loop detection.
2) We propose a loop closure optimization to correct cam-
era pose drift and dynamic updates to Gaussian submaps,
preserving model integrity.
3) We propose a two-stage bundled adjustment strategy that
uses constraints on the rendered image and pose graph
structure to globally refine the camera pose.
Through extensive quantitative and qualitative evaluations on
both virtual and real-world datasets, we demonstrate that our
Gaussian Splatting SLAM system significantly outperforms
state-of-the-art methods in both camera pose estimation and
novel view rendering tasks. The open sourcing of our code
will further enable the community to build upon and extend
this work.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Visual-based Tracking and Reconstruction
Given monocular [1], [19], stereo [4], [5], or RGB-D [20],
[21] videos, the goals of visual SLAM methods are to esti-
mate 6-DoF camera poses and reconstruct unknown scenes
incrementally. Feature-based SLAM methods [1], [5], [8] rely
heavily on extracting sparse points features from images,
which are fed to the feature matching algorithms to esti-
mate the relative motions between viewpoints. To reduce the
computation in descriptor calculation, FastORB-SLAM [22]
proposes a lightweight and effective method to track key
points without computing descriptors. In man-made scenes,
low-textured scenarios are difficult to provide enough reliable
points to achieve robust tracking and mapping. Therefore,
Other types of features, such as lines [23] and planes [20],
[24], are explored to compensate for the degeneration cases.
Benefitting the matching results of planes and lines, new resid-
uals are introduced in SLAM systems [25] to achieve more
accurate and robust tracking results. Instead of reconstructing
sparse point clouds as these feature-based SLAM systems
did, the advent of depth cameras supports efficient dense
modeling. Among these, Kinectfusion [6] enables real-time
3D model construction using only depth images, thus achiev-
ing real-time rigid reconstruction with consumer cameras.
ElasticFusion [26] employs dense frame-to-model tracking,
window-based surface fusion, and frequent model refinement
through non-rigid surface deformation to achieve dense SLAM
modeling. BundleFusion [27] offers one of the best-performing
algorithm frameworks, particularly excelling in loop closure
and robust error correction in textured environments. Volume
Fusion algorithms enable reconstruction in larger scenes and
support real-time tracking and reconstruction using RGB-D
cameras with CUDA acceleration. InfiniTAM [28] provides
a lightweight yet powerful solution for 3D scene reconstruc-
tion and tracking on limited hardware resources. Dynamic-
Fusion [29] focuses on dense SLAM reconstruction of non-
rigidly deforming scenes by calculating scene flow and inverse
transformation. BAD-SLAM [21] introduces a fast and direct
bundle adjustment method capable of dense map optimiza-
tion previously unachievable by traditional BA approaches.
Even though these SLAM systems provide robust camera
pose estimation and 3D scene reconstruction solutions, it is
difficult to generate high-quality RGB and depth maps at novel
viewpoints based on these 3D reconstructed models.
B. Gaussian Splatting SLAM
3D GS approaches are proposed for photo-realistic novel
view rendering tasks based on ground truth camera poses
and sparse point clouds provided by Structure-of-Motion al-
gorithms [30], [31]. Compared to Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [9] that uses implicit scene representation based on
MLP networks, 3D GS [32] employs explicit representations
of scenes and differentiable rendering modules. This ensures
real-time rendering capabilities while introducing unprece-
dented levels of control and scene editing. The core concept
of 3D GS involves constructing a large collection of 3D
Gaussians that accurately capture the essence of a scene. This
facilitates free-viewpoint rendering and is optimized through
differentiable rendering to adapt to the textures present in a
given scene.
In GS-SLAM systems, camera pose estimation, 3D map-
ping, and view rendering are considered in a unified architec-
ture. Anisotropic Gaussians enable more detailed and accurate
environmental modeling, particularly suitable for complex or
dynamically changing scenes. The Gaussian Splatting SLAM
(MonoGS) [15] marks the first application of 3D GS for
incremental tracking and rendering. In response to challenges
such as slow rendering speeds and difficulty in optimization
when dealing with large-scale, high-density environments, a
novel SLAM system, SplaTAM [33] is introduced to utilize
a silhouette mask to obtain the scene density, achieving
faster rendering and optimization speeds while simplifying the
dense mapping process. RGBD GS-ICP SLAM [34] employs

<!-- page 3 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
Loop Closure
Loop Detection
Pose Graph Optimization
Gaussian & Camera Pose Adjusting
History Gaussians Novel Gaussians
Multiple RGB-D Sensor
Gaussian Point Clouds
Input Images
History Gaussians Novel Gaussians
History Gaussians Novel Gaussians
Rendered Images
Camera Tracking
Gaussian Parameter Updating
Fig. 2: Architecture of the proposed Gaussian Splatting SLAM. The input of our system is the current RGB-D frame
from rotating multiple RGB-D cameras. In the camera tracking and Gaussian parameters update process, we utilize differential
rasterization results of three cameras to design effective loss functions. If a loop is detected, pose graph optimization is triggered
first, then 3D Gaussian positions will be adjusted based on updates of camera poses, and finally a local bundle adjustment
module is employed to further refine camera poses, ultimately achieving accurate camera poses and a 3D Gaussian map.
Generalized-ICP to estimate poses through matching Gaus-
sians from the current frame and the map. Keyframe selection
strategies further enhance rendering performance and tracking
capabilities. These advancements highlight the versatility and
effectiveness of 3D Gaussian Splatting across various SLAM
applications, demonstrating its potential to handle complex
environments and improve real-time rendering and tracking
in dynamic scenes. However, these methods heavily depend
on the (appearance and depth) alignment between observed
and rendered images. When the residuals provide limited con-
straints for rendering-based optimization, both pose estimation
and rendering performance degrade significantly. In contrast,
the proposed method introduces a Gaussian Splatting Loop
Closure module that effectively addresses errors in camera
pose estimation and 3D Gaussian representation for rotating
multiple RGB-D cameras, resulting in geometrically consistent
3D Gaussians.
III. SYSTEM OVERVIEW
A. Rotating Multiple RGB-D Cameras
Compared to handheld scanning, fixed scanning [35] in-
volves using a robot to rotate the camera setup in a fixed
position, as illustrated in Figure 2. This setup [18] typically
includes multiple RGB-D cameras with overlapping fields of
view, significantly extending the overall coverage and enabling
a comprehensive scan of unknown environments. There are
several advantages to using a rotating device with RGB-
D cameras for scene reconstruction and rendering tasks in
unknown environments. First, the robot precisely controls
the camera motion, eliminating inconsistencies and errors
associated with handheld scanning. This controlled movement
enables more accurate data collection and alignment, resulting
in higher-quality reconstruction performance. Additionally, by
handling camera motion, computational resources can be allo-
cated more efficiently to the mapping and rendering modules,
enhancing their performance for faster and more accurate
scene rendering. Furthermore, using multiple cameras with
overlapping fields of view significantly increases the area that
can be scanned in a single pass, reducing the number of scans
needed and streamlining the mapping process.
Therefore, the use of a rotating device with RGB-D cam-
eras offers significant advantages over handheld scanning for
scene reconstruction in unknown indoor environments. The
combination of controllable camera motion, efficient use of
computational resources, extended field of view, effective loop
closure, and improved data consistency makes this approach
highly effective for these tasks. How to make use of the
fixed scanning device for 3D Gaussian Splatting SLAM is
introduced in the following sections.
B. 3D Gaussian Splatting
Similar to popular GS-based approaches [32], the 3D Gaus-
sian ellipsoid representation is used as the only map primitive
format in this paper. In this section, we briefly introduce the
background and operations of 3D Gaussian Splatting. First,
the representation of each 3D Gaussian G is denoted as
G = [¬µ S U c o]
(1)
here ¬µ, c, o are the mean vector, color, and opacity of G,
respectively. In our system, it is convenient to obtain the
point clouds in camera coordinates based on the depth map
and the intrinsic matrix, which can be transferred to the
world coordinate frame via the rigid transformation Twc, from
camera coordinates to world coordinates. Given point clouds

<!-- page 4 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
in the world coordinate frames, their positions are used to
build the mean vectors of 3D Gaussians. Then, scaling matrix
S and rotation U are to build the covariance matrix Œ£ of G
via the following formulate:
Œ£ = USST UT ,
(2)
here S can be represented as a diagonal matrix with
diag(sx sy sz), and U = [Ux Uy Uz], U ‚ààSO(3) is
the orthornormal matrix. In this paper, to reduce the size of
parameters. sx, sy, and sz are set as equal and the color c is
using color of pixel directly.
After obtaining the 3D Gaussian representation Gw in the
world coordinate frame, we continue to describe the view
rendering process. To render images, 3D Gaussians in the
world coordinates are projected onto 2D image planes based
on transformation Tcw. First, the splatting operation is to
form 2D Gaussians (N(¬µI, Œ£I)) on image planes from 3D
Gaussians (N(¬µw, Œ£w)) in the world coordinate based on
camera poses. The process can be described as:
(
¬µI = ŒÝ(Tcw¬µw)
Œ£I = JWcwŒ£wWT
cwJT
(3)
here Tcw =
 Wcw
tcw
0
1

, Tcw ‚ààSE(3) is the camera
pose from the world to the camera coordinates, Wcw and tcw
are rotational and translational components, respectively. J is
the Jacobian matrix of the projective transformation. And the
ŒÝ(¬∑) represents the re-projection function.
Then, the alpha-blending operation is used to establish
colors based on the following formulation:
Cp =
X
i‚ààN
cioi
i‚àí1
Y
j=1
(1 ‚àíoj).
(4)
here ci and oi represent the color and opacity of the ith
Gaussian Gi. Since the 3D Gaussian Splatting and blending
operations are differentiable, Gaussian parameters can be
trained gradually based on optimization solvers.
IV. METHODOLOGY
A. Tracking
When three pairs of RGB-D images are fed to the system,
as shown in Figure 2, we first make use of the motion model
to estimate the initial pose of the current frame. Based on
the initial pose, 3D Gaussian ellipsoids are used to render
RGB and depth maps from this viewpoint. Then, we compute
the residuals in photometric and geometric manners between
rendered and observed images, where these residuals are used
to build the loss function of a pair of RGB-D images as
shown in Equation 5. Similar to SplaTAM [33], we utilize
the silhouette mask S(p) to capture scene density and refine
the initial camera pose by minimizing the joint loss function
derived from color and depth maps:
Lt =
X
p
(S(p) > 0.99)(L1(Egeo) + 0.5L1(Epho))
(5)
where Egeo and Epho are defined as geometric and photo-
metric loss functions between rendered images and observers,
respectively. They are handled by the L1 loss. To make the
tracking module robust, these pixels with depth values 0 and
S(p) < 0.99 are ignored in the loss computation. To be
specific, Egeo and Epho are computed by
(
Epho = C(Tcw, Gw) ‚àí¬ØC
Egeo = D(Tcw, Gw) ‚àí¬ØD
(6)
here C(Tcw, G) and D(Tcw, G) render the Gaussians G from
Tcw to RGB and depth images, respectively. And ¬ØC and ¬ØD
are images obtained from the device.
To make full use of the input of the three cameras, we not
only use the middle camera to render the color image and
depth map during the tracking process but also use the upper
and lower cameras to render the color image and depth map
to calculate the joint loss Ltrack:
Ltrack = Lt‚àíup + Lt‚àímid + Lt‚àídown
(7)
where Lt‚àíup, Lt‚àímid, and Lt‚àídown are using the same
computation as Lt. Since the upper and lower cameras overlap
with the middle camera, intra-frame constraints can be formed,
making the camera parameter update more accurate and stable.
B. Keyframe Selection and Gaussian Densification
To improve the tracking and rendering efficiency of the
system, we save each 5th frame as a keyframe, instead of
using all input images to jointly optimize the Gaussians
and camera poses. For each keyframe, we store color and
depth images from all three cameras. In addition to these
keyframes, we maintain a separate collection of general images
as rand-list, which are selected from the middle of adjacent
keyframes. These general images only capture the color and
depth information from the middle camera.
After finishing tracking the current frame, we perform a
Gaussian densification operation to enhance the 3D Gaus-
sian map based on the estimated camera pose. Unlike the
densification process in 3DGS [32], which focuses solely on
existing map information, our approach integrates data from
both general and keyframe images. The process begins by
identifying which pixel areas are inadequately represented by
the existing 3D Gaussians, using a densification detection
mask [33]. This mask highlights regions where the map‚Äôs
density is insufficient. For each pixel in these regions, new
Gaussians are initialized to improve the map‚Äôs overall density
and accuracy.
Furthermore, in the densification process, the jth new Gaus-
sian Gj is associated with the anchor frame Fi by collecting
timestamp ti to the Gaussian iGj. Therefore, we add another
parameter to each Gaussian, and the representation of iGj can
be defined as
iGj = [¬µ Œ£ c o ti]
(8)
where Œ£ is computed via Equation 2.
Then, we implement the Gaussian parameter optimization
stage by fixing the camera poses and refining the Gaussian
parameters. Similar to the camera tracking stage, we use a
loss function to optimize the Gaussian parameters. Referring
to 3D Gaussian splatting [32], the loss function for optimizing

<!-- page 5 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
Gaussian parameters includes an additional D-SSIM [32] term
compared to the tracking loss function:
Lm =
X
p
(0.8L1(Epho) + 0.2LD‚àíSSIM + 2L1(Egeo)). (9)
Due to the input from the three cameras, our system needs to
optimize more Gaussian parameters, making the optimization
problem more complex. Therefore, similar to the tracking
section, we use the loss function Equation 9 from multi-
ple viewpoints to jointly optimize the Gaussian parameters.
Specifically, we use the current frame and randomly select a
keyframe from the keyframe database that has visual overlaps
with the current frame to calculate the loss:
Lmap = ŒªLm‚àíup + Lm‚àímid + ŒªLm‚àídown
(10)
here Lm‚àíup, Lm‚àímid, and Lm‚àídown are using the same
computation manner as Lm.
Additionally, to prevent forgetting the global map, in the
optimization process, we randomly select a frame from the
keyframe list and a frame from rand-list that do not overlap
with the current frame. We calculate the loss using the middle
camera and add this to the loss function Lmap used for
optimizing the Gaussian parameters. If both novel and history
Gaussians are captured in these frames, we calculate the loss
using only the novel Gaussians, and the method to obtain
different types of Gaussians is introduced in Section IV-C.
C. Loop Closure
In the camera pose tracking process, the drift is typically
witnessed, which leads to the noisy Gaussian map and worse
initials for Gaussian Splatting optimization. To solve the
problem, we propose a novel loop closure module for Gaussian
Splatting SLAM, which contains three stages: loop detection,
drift estimation, and optimization.
a) Loop Detection:
During tracking and Gaussian pa-
rameter optimization, 3D Gaussians are classified into two
groups, history and novel Gaussian sets, according to the
timestamps collected in Gaussian parameters. For example,
if the difference between Gaussian‚Äôs timestamp and the times-
tamp tc of the current frame exceeds a fixed threshold œÑt, the
3D Gaussian iGj will be added into the set of Sc
h, otherwise
will be added into Sc
n,
(
Sc
h = [iGj| œÑt ‚â§|ti ‚àítc|]
Sc
n = [iGj| œÑt > |ti ‚àítc|]
(11)
here Sc
h and Sc
n are the history and novel Gaussian sets of
frame Fc, respectively. It has to be mentioned that both history
and novel sets of Gaussians for each frame are collected
virtually instead of saving them in memories to improve
efficiency.
Since newly generated Gaussians in Sc
n are unaffected by
noise, only Gaussians in Sc
n are involved in tracking and
optimizing Gaussian parameters for the current frame. Once
the camera pose Tcw is obtained, we re-project the positions
of Gaussians from both the history set Sc
h and the novel set
Sc
n onto the image plane. We then count the number of these
re-projected positions on the image plane, denoting them as
N c
n for the novel set and N c
h for the history one. If the ratio
Œ≥ = N c
h
N cn exceeds a predefined threshold œÑr, we can know that
the scenario is already detected before, then a candidate loop
frame is collected by the system.
Additionally, another strategy is proposed to obtain the best
one from candidates by rendering two images at this viewpoint
based on two sets Sc
n and Sc
h, respectively. Based on the SSIM
metric, we continue to compare the SSIM distance between
these two images. We then select the one that has the best
SSIM similarity as the final loop frame.
b) Pose Graph Optimization:
Given the loop frame
detected in the former stage, a lightweight pose graph is
implemented in this paper to remove camera pose drift and
achieve accurate trajectories. In our pose graph, each vertex
is built based Tciw and there are two types of edges E to
connect these vertices, where the first one is estimated based
on the relative transformations of adjacent camera poses, and
the second component is the accurate relative pose Tcicj of
the frames at endpoints of the loop, which can be determined
by rendering history Gaussians to the current frame Fj using
Equation 7. By analyzing the timestamps of the historical
Gaussian ellipsoids, we identify the dominant class ti that
has the highest count as another endpoint of the loop, Fi.
Therefore, the pose graph can be defined as
min
Wwci,twci
X
(i,j)‚ààE
(LR3(tij, W‚ä§
wci(twcj ‚àítwci))2
+ LSO(3)(Wij, W‚ä§
wciWwcj)2)
(12)
where LR3(ta, tb) denotes the Euclidean distance between
two translation vectors, while LSO(3)(Wa, Wb) ) represents
a distance metric between two orientations in SO(3). In this
way, the pose graph optimization module allows us to adjust
the camera poses of all frames.
c) Gaussian Updating and Bundle Adjusting: Benefiting
from the proposed Gaussian-frame association strategy, it is
easy to correct errors in 3D Gaussian maps via a linear updat-
ing process. For example, for a 3D Gaussian with timestamp
ti, its position ¬µ will be updated according to the refined pose
of the anchor frame via the following function
¬µ‚àó= ToptT‚àí1
origin¬µ
(13)
where ¬µ‚àóis the updated position of G, and T‚àí1
origin represents
the camera poses before pose graph optimization, and Topt
represents the camera poses after pose graph optimization.
Benefiting from the Gaussian representation, the covariance
matrix Œ£ does not need to be updated, which reduces compu-
tation burdens of the loop closure module.
After updating camera poses based on pose graph refine-
ment and the positions of Gaussians, we then adjust the
camera poses of all frames to achieve more accurate and
consistent camera poses aligned with the 3D Gaussian map.
Compared to the lightweight pose graph optimization before,
this step refines both keyframes and frames in rand-list based
on photometric and geometric constraints. Specifically, we first
mix frames in the keyframe database and rand-list together,
and then divide these frames into several bins, where each bin
has N frames adjacent in the timestamp. What is more, we

<!-- page 6 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
Method
Metric
room (2‚ó¶)
room (3‚ó¶)
room (4‚ó¶)
office(2‚ó¶)
office(3‚ó¶)
office (4‚ó¶)
Avg.
MonoGS [36]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
30.09
27.21
25.84
30.71
29.73
27.22
28.467
SSIM‚Üë
0.914
0.886
0.864
0.859
0.855
0.827
0.868
LPIPS‚Üì
0.166
0.22
0.275
0.185
0.21
0.263
0.220
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
1.3
2.3
2.9
2.9
2.7
4.4
2.75
Gaussian-SLAM [37]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
33.55
33.55
32.22
33.01
34.17
34.97
33.578
SSIM‚Üë
0.965
0.963
0.953
0.962
0.964
0.972
0.963
LPIPS‚Üì
0.108
0.117
0.142
0.098
0.084
0.074
0.104
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.71
0.80
0.75
1.1
1.2
1.1
0.977
SplaTAM [33]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
34.88
34.90
35.45
34.10
33.81
33.79
34.473
SSIM‚Üë
0.973
0.973
0.978
0.970
0.972
0.971
0.973
LPIPS‚Üì
0.090
0.082
0.055
0.097
0.089
0.081
0.082
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.60
0.61
0.55
0.82
0.80
0.82
0.700
Ours
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
38.19
38.03
37.55
37.39
37.11
37.11
37.565
SSIM‚Üë
0.993
0.993
0.992
0.988
0.988
0.987
0.990
LPIPS‚Üì
0.035
0.033
0.039
0.032
0.032
0.033
0.034
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.40
0.38
0.39
0.47
0.49
0.49
0.437
TABLE I: Rendering and reconstruction performance on virtual datasets without noise and jitters. Results with best
accuracy are highlighted by bold font.
Method
Metric
room2n1
room3n1
room4n1
office2n1
office3n1
office4n1
Avg.
MonoGS [36]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
30.25
27.82
25.61
30.91
27.75
28.19
28.422
SSIM‚Üë
0.916
0.893
0.863
0.863
0.834
0.839
0.868
LPIPS‚Üì
0.165
0.21
0.267
0.170
0.249
0.254
0.219
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
1.4
2.5
3.7
2.9
4.2
4.6
3.217
Gaussian-SLAM [37]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
35.47
35.11
34.69
35.48
35.05
35.24
35.173
SSIM‚Üë
0.980
0.978
0.976
0.986
0.980
0.980
0.980
LPIPS‚Üì
0.093
0.094
0.094
0.068
0.071
0.071
0.081
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.56
0.57
0.58
0.91
0.86
0.94
0.736
SplaTAM [33]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
35.90
36.10
36.51
34.49
34.39
34.82
35.368
SSIM‚Üë
0.979
0.981
0.981
0.975
0.974
0.997
0.978
LPIPS‚Üì
0.081
0.069
0.063
0.084
0.075
0.071
0.074
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.57
0.65
0.68
0.88
0.94
1.03
0.792
Ours
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
39.43
39.39
39.44
37.91
38.03
37.87
38.678
SSIM‚Üë
0.994
0.994
0.994
0.990
0.990
0.990
0.992
LPIPS‚Üì
0.026
0.026
0.027
0.027
0.027
0.028
0.026
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.49
0.49
0.49
0.68
0.68
0.69
0.586
TABLE II: Rendering and reconstruction performance on virtual datasets with noise and jitters. Results with best
accuracy are highlighted by bold font.
optimize camera poses collected in each bin Bj via an efficient
bundle adjustment, in Equation 14, that only considers the
image of the middle camera,
Llocal =
X
i‚ààBj
Lt‚àímid,i.
(14)
Once the camera poses for the keyframes and rand-list
frames are optimized, we fix these poses and perform pose
graph optimization following the graph structure estimated in
Equation 12, to refine the poses of all non-keyframes and
non-rand-list frames. This approach ensures that the camera
poses across the entire sequence are accurately adjusted,
improving the overall consistency of the 3D Gaussian map
and trajectories.
V. EXPERIMENT
A. Implementation Details
Our method is implemented in Python using the PyTorch
framework, incorporating CUDA code for time-critical raster-
ization and gradient computation of Gaussian splatting, and
we run our SLAM on a desktop with Intel(R) Xeon(R) Silver
4210R and a single NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3080 Ti. In all
experiments, we consider every fifth frame as a keyframe.
Furthermore, we set the thresholds œÑr=0.8, œÑssim=25, œÑt=60
for all experiments and use Œª=0.5 for virtual datasets, Œª=0.4
for real-world datasets.
B. Datasets
There are synthetic [18] and real-world [18] datasets used
in the evaluation section. We introduce the details of these

<!-- page 7 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
Method
Metric
office 0
office 1
office 2
hotel 0
hotel 1
labor 0
labor 1
labor 2
Avg.
MonoGS [36]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
11.86
21.23
14.43
21.62
19.52
12.71
16.27
17.81
16.931
SSIM‚Üë
0.092
0.74
0.337
0.799
0.717
0.568
0.610
0.704
0.571
LPIPS‚Üì
0.96
0.439
0.850
0.345
0.503
0.637
0.568
0.376
0.585
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
69.6
12.02
33.07
6.79
12.33
48.90
23.95
11.59
27.281
Gaussian-SLAM [37]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
29.49
30.59
29.15
28.43
24.96
16.12
24.93
24.95
26.078
SSIM‚Üë
0.954
0.954
0.917
0.937
0.889
0.591
0.903
0.890
0.879
LPIPS‚Üì
0.136
0.132
0.21
0.194
0.345
0.647
0.216
0.254
0.267
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.23
0.24
0.52
0.33
0.95
0.92
0.26
0.22
0.458
SplaTAM [33]
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
34.29
33.49
33.95
30.83
32.49
32.08
30.79
33.21
32.641
SSIM‚Üë
0.987
0.983
0.983
0.971
0.977
0.990
0.977
0.986
0.982
LPIPS‚Üì
0.024
0.036
0.039
0.051
0.049
0.017
0.030
0.030
0.035
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.55
0.49
0.35
0.32
0.31
0.61
0.59
0.35
0.446
Ours
PSNR[dB] ‚Üë
35.65
35.68
36.54
33.99
35.66
32.86
31.76
34.90
34.63
SSIM‚Üë
0.993
0.992
0.991
0.986
0.989
0.992
0.990
0.992
0.991
LPIPS‚Üì
0.016
0.022
0.018
0.032
0.032
0.014
0.018
0.021
0.022
Depth L1[cm]‚Üì
0.29
0.28
0.24
0.19
0.21
0.50
0.36
0.28
0.294
TABLE III: Rendering and reconstruction performance in real-world sequences. Results with best accuracy are highlighted
by bold font.
datasets in this section.
Virtual Dataset. The synthetic dataset is derived from the
ICL-NUIM dataset [38]. It simulates the motion of three
cameras during device rotation, rendering RGB-D images
separately for both ‚Äòliving room‚Äô and ‚Äòoffice‚Äô scenes from
the ICL-NUIM dataset. The images are captured at 30 Hz
with a resolution of 640 √ó 480 pixels.The terms ‚Äòroom‚Äô and
‚Äòoffice‚Äô in the dataset names denote different scene categories.
The numbers 2, 3, 4 following ‚Äòroom‚Äô or ‚Äòoffice‚Äô indicate that
the motor rotates by 2, 3, 4 degrees per frame. The suffix
‚Äòn1‚Äô signifies that random perturbations were applied to the
motor‚Äôs rotation axis coordinates, simulating the unavoidable
shake motion observed during real-world data acquisition, and
the noise was added to the depth images to simulate real-world
conditions.
Real-world Dataset. A real-world dataset was created based
on the rotating acquisition device proposed in [18] used to
capture common indoor scene information and compile it into
a realistic scene dataset. The dataset includes three types of
static scenes: offices, laboratories, and hotels, each captured
from various positions with multiple sets of sensor information
sequences. Each scene varies in size, encompassing challeng-
ing areas such as flat and low-texture regions. During data
collection, the acquisition device was positioned at appropriate
locations within the scenes, controlling the device to rotate at
a constant speed exceeding 360¬∞, approximately 0.25œÄ radians
per second.
C. Baselines and Metrics.
We primarily benchmark our SLAM method against
existing state-of-the-art GS-based SLAM approaches such
as SplaTAM [33], MonoGS [36], Gaussian-SLAM [37].
SplaTAM achieves faster rendering and optimization by
streamlining the dense mapping process, while MonoGS em-
ploys a co-visibility graph for optimization and Gaussian-
SLAM organizes environments into sub-maps, optimizing
them independently.
Following the evaluation metrics from GS-based SLAM
SplaTAM [33], we employ standard photometric rendering
quality metrics to assess the quality of novel view render-
ing, including Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR), Structural
Similarity Index Measure (SSIM), and Learned Perceptual
Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS). Furthermore, the quality of
geometry generated by different approaches is evaluated by
the L1 distance between reconstructed depth maps and their
ground truth. Since the camera pose estimation performance
is also a very important function for SLAM methods, we
report the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the Absolute
Trajectory Error (ATE) of all frames.
D. Novel View Rendering
As listed in Table I and II, approaches‚Äô rendering perfor-
mances are tested in virtual sequences, where the difference
between two types of sequence is that images and trajectories
in Table I are added noise. What is more, the approaches tested
are the original published version. Compared to MonoGS,
Gaussian-SLAM, and SplaTAM, the proposed method has
shown better rendering quality in all sequences in Tablee I
and II. For example, in the ‚Äòoffice (2‚ó¶)‚Äô sequence, the PSNR
result of the proposed method is 38.19 dB, which is 3.3 dB
and 4.38 dB higher than that of SplaTAM and MonoGS,
respectively. Furthermore, from another perspective, in the
same environment, like the ‚Äòroom‚Äô scene, but from different
viewpoints, the proposed method has better performance in
‚Äòroom (2‚ó¶)‚Äô. Additionally, as the device rotation increases,
the rendering performance of this method will also degrade
from 38.19 dB to 37.55 dB since the overlaps between frames
become larger incrementally. A similar phenomenon can be

<!-- page 8 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
office3n1
office4n1
room3n1
MonoGS
Gaussian-SLAM
SplaTAM
Ours
Fig. 3: Comparison of novel view rendering in virtual sequences. This is also supported by the quantitative results in Table I
and II.
seen in Table II, the average rendering performance in PSNR,
SSIM, and LPIPS are 38.678 dB, 0.992, and 0.026, respec-
tively, which show more accurate and robust performance
compared to other approaches. Especially for MonoGS, there
are 30% performance drop from our 38.678 dB to 28.422 dB in
the PSNR metric. As shown in Figure 3, the rendered images
generated from different approaches in the ‚Äòoffice‚Äô and ‚Äòroom‚Äô
scenes are illustrated. For the results of MonoGS, it is easy to
detect outlier areas. Limited by camera pose estimation, the
3D Gaussian maps of MonoGS have the problem of scene
splitting, leading to the rendering performance in the first,
second, and fourth rows.
Different from virtual sequences used in Table I and II, we
evaluate these SLAM systems on real-world datasets as shown
in Table III. Compared to synthesis datasets, the novel view
rendering tasks are more difficult in real-world sequences. In
Figure 5, six scenes are illustrated. For MonoGS, the rendering
results are very blurry, especially in ‚Äòoffice 0‚Äô, ‚Äòoffice 1‚Äô, and
‚Äòoffice 2‚Äô sequences. Compared to MonoGS, the Gaussian-
SLAM method is more robust in these scenes, but it has
worse results in indoor sequences, as shown in ‚Äòlabor 0‚Äô and
‚Äòlabor 1‚Äô. For the sequence ‚Äòlabor 2‚Äô, there is a black hole

<!-- page 9 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
9
office4n1
room4n1
office 0
office 1
hotel 0
labor 0
MonoGS
Gaussian-SLAM
SplaTAM
Ours
Fig. 4: Comparison of depth error maps on virtual and real-world datasets. Depth error maps obtained by calculating
the differences between the rendered images and the ground truth are attached for better comparison. In these maps, shades
of blue or cooler tones indicate smaller differences, while reds or warmer tones signify larger discrepancies.

<!-- page 10 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
office 0
office 1
office 2
labor 0
labor 1
labor 2
MonoGS
Gaussian-SLAM
SplaTAM
Ours
Ground Truth
Fig. 5: Comparison of novel view rendering on the real-world dataset. This is also supported by the quantitative results in
Table III.
in the rendered image, where the area is a reflective area.
However, in our method, the area is reconstructed correctly.
Furthermore, compared to the results of SplaTAM and ground
truth, it is easy to find that, there are alignment problems since
the predicted camera poses and 3D Gaussians are not in the
correct way.
E. Depth Estimation
Based on 3D Gaussian models, we further render their depth
maps to evaluate the quality of their 3D Gaussian models. By
using an alpha-blending algorithm, the quality of the depth
map becomes good when these Gaussian ellipsoids are aligned
with the surface of the scenes.
As listed in Table I and II, the proposed method has
achieved robust depth rendering results in virtual sequences.
To be specific, the average depth distance errors are 0.437
cm and 0.586 cm in virtual ‚àíwo ‚àínoise and ‚àíw ‚àínoise,
respectively. But, for other state-of-the-art approaches, the
accuracy of depth maps is rendered in worse quality, where
in virtual ‚àíwo ‚àínoise sequences, the average results of
MonoGS, Gaussian-SLAM, and SplaTAM are 2.75 cm, 0.977
cm, and 0.700 cm.

<!-- page 11 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
11
Method
room (2‚ó¶)
room (3‚ó¶)
room (4‚ó¶)
office (2‚ó¶)
office (3‚ó¶)
office (4‚ó¶)
Avg.
MonoGS [36]
5.20
6.60
8.80
9.13
5.20
11.05
7.663
Gaussian-SLAM [37]
0.94
0.99
1.30
1.75
1.17
0.92
1.178
SplaTAM [33]
0.729
0.679
0.517
0.793
0.669
0.831
0.703
Ours
0.212
0.221
0.194
0.162
0.140
0.170
0.183
TABLE IV: Trajectory errors in ATE [cm]‚Üìon virtual sequences without noise and jitters. Results with best accuracy
are highlighted by bold font.
Method
room2n1
room3n1
room4n1
office2n1
office3n1
office4n1
Avg.
MonoGS [36]
4.60
8.42
4.81
8.39
10.2
9.98
7.733
Gaussian-SLAM [37]
0.44
0.49
0.50
0.70
0.73
0.79
0.608
SplaTAM [33]
0.772
0.63
0.57
0.834
0.734
0.893
0.739
Ours
0.226
0.253
0.255
0.164
0.161
0.173
0.205
TABLE V: Trajectory errors in ATE [cm]‚Üìon virtual sequences with noise and jitters. Results with best accuracy are
highlighted by bold font.
A similar phenomenon can be witnessed in Figure 4,
where rendered depth maps generated virtual and real scenes
are compared to ground truth depth maps. For MonoGS,
the depth estimation performance in ‚Äòoffice4n1‚Äô and ‚Äòof-
fice 0‚Äô sequences has a large distance. Compared to MnonGS,
Gaussian-SLAM, and SplaTAM approaches show more robust
results in most regions. But in some corner regions and low-
textured regions, these two methods also suffer from high
distance errors. For the proposed method, benefitting from the
drift removal and optimization strategies, more accurate depth
estimation performance has been shown.
F. Pose Estimation
Besides rendering performance in appearance and geometry,
we also evaluate the pose estimation performance of these
methods. As shown in Table IV and V, the estimated trajec-
tories are compared to the ground truth ones. Compared to
these state of the art, the proposed method shows robust and
accurate camera pose estimation results. From the perspective
of average ATE errors, this method is 2 times more accurate
than the Gaussian-SLAM method, and more accurate than
SplaTAM and MonoGS.
G. Ablation Studies
In Table VI and
VII, we ablate four aspects of our
system:(1) the use of timesteps to differentiate between novel
and previously encountered 3D Gaussian. (2) the use of a
pose graph to optimize global pose during loop detection. (3)
After the pose graph optimization is completed, the global
Gaussian map subsequently undergoes an additional 3000
iterations of refinement using the loss function mentioned
in IV-B. (4) After the pose graph optimization is completed,
the global Gaussian map is then refined using the method
Gaussian update mentioned earlier in IV-C. We do this using
room3n1 and office3n1 of the virtual dataset. After optimizing
the global camera poses using pose graph optimization, the
accuracy of camera tracking improved, but the overall render-
ing performance showed minimal change and even declined
Time-
stamp
Pose graph
optimization
Iterative
optimization
Gaussian
updating
ATE
[cm]‚Üì
PSNR
[dB]‚Üë
Dep. L1
[cm]‚Üì
%
%
%
%
0.568
36.31
0.62
"
"
%
%
0.285
36.01
0.83
"
"
"
%
0.260
37.68
0.54
"
"
%
"
0.253
39.57
0.49
TABLE VI: Ablation Studies of using different modules of
the proposed system in virtual sequence room3n1.
Time-
stamp
Pose graph
optimization
Iterative
optimization
Gaussian
updating
ATE
[cm]‚Üì
PSNR
[dB]‚Üë
Dep. L1
[cm]‚Üì
%
%
%
%
0.235
36.64
0.76
"
"
%
%
0.162
36.69
0.79
"
"
"
%
0.160
36.88
0.72
"
"
%
"
0.161
38.03
0.68
TABLE VII: Ablation Studies of using different modules
of the proposed system in virtual sequence office3n1.
in the dataset room3n1. Long-term iterative optimization of
the global map can enhance overall rendering performance.
However, this optimization is not sufficiently robust and the
improvements are limited.
VI. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
In this paper, we propose a robust Gaussian Splatting SLAM
system for rotating devices with multiple RGB-D cameras,
which achieves accurate localization and photorealistic ren-
dering performance based on the novel Gaussian-based loop
closure module. In the loop detection step, we first label
a timestamp to each Gaussian and categorize Gaussians as
historical or novel groups based on its timestamp. By rendering
different Gaussian types at the same viewpoint, we propose a
loop detection strategy that considers co-visibility relationships
and distinct rendering outcomes. Based on the loop detection
results, a loop closure optimization approach is proposed to
remove camera pose drift and maintain the high quality of

<!-- page 12 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
12
3D Gaussian models. The approach uses a lightweight pose
graph optimization algorithm to correct pose drift and updates
Gaussians based on the optimized poses. Additionally, a bun-
dle adjustment scheme refines camera poses using photometric
and geometric constraints.
In future work, we will explore to update the proposed
Gaussian Splatting SLAM system for dynamic scenes by using
4D Gaussian Splatting algorithms. Based on the detection of
dynamic regions, the static areas will be fed to the proposed
loop closure module, while leveraging smooth motion con-
straints for dynamic objects to achieve more accurate tracking
and rendering in more general environments.
REFERENCES
[1] R. Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardos, ‚ÄúOrb-slam: a versatile
and accurate monocular slam system,‚Äù IEEE transactions on robotics,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1147‚Äì1163, 2015.
[2] Y. Li, N. Brasch, Y. Wang, N. Navab, and F. Tombari, ‚ÄúStructure-slam:
Low-drift monocular slam in indoor environments,‚Äù IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 6583‚Äì6590, 2020.
[3] K. Sun, K. Mohta, B. Pfrommer, M. Watterson, S. Liu, Y. Mulgaonkar,
C. J. Taylor, and V. Kumar, ‚ÄúRobust stereo visual inertial odometry for
fast autonomous flight,‚Äù IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3,
no. 2, pp. 965‚Äì972, 2018.
[4] J. Engel, J. St¬®uckler, and D. Cremers, ‚ÄúLarge-scale direct slam with
stereo cameras,‚Äù in 2015 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelli-
gent robots and systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 1935‚Äì1942.
[5] R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tard¬¥os, ‚ÄúOrb-slam2: An open-source slam
system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras,‚Äù IEEE transactions
on robotics, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1255‚Äì1262, 2017.
[6] R. A. Newcombe, S. Izadi, O. Hilliges, D. Molyneaux, D. Kim,
A. J. Davison, P. Kohi, J. Shotton, S. Hodges, and A. Fitzgibbon,
‚ÄúKinectfusion: Real-time dense surface mapping and tracking,‚Äù in 2011
10th IEEE international symposium on mixed and augmented reality.
Ieee, 2011, pp. 127‚Äì136.
[7] T. Qin, P. Li, and S. Shen, ‚ÄúVins-mono: A robust and versatile monocular
visual-inertial state estimator,‚Äù IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34,
no. 4, pp. 1004‚Äì1020, 2018.
[8] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodr¬¥ƒ±guez, J. M. Montiel, and J. D.
Tard¬¥os, ‚ÄúOrb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual‚Äì
inertial, and multimap slam,‚Äù IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37,
no. 6, pp. 1874‚Äì1890, 2021.
[9] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, ‚ÄúNerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,‚Äù Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99‚Äì106,
2021.
[10] A. Rosinol, J. J. Leonard, and L. Carlone, ‚ÄúNerf-slam: Real-time
dense monocular slam with neural radiance fields,‚Äù in 2023 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 3437‚Äì3444.
[11] C.-M. Chung, Y.-C. Tseng, Y.-C. Hsu, X.-Q. Shi, Y.-H. Hua, J.-F. Yeh,
W.-C. Chen, Y.-T. Chen, and W. H. Hsu, ‚ÄúOrbeez-slam: A real-time
monocular visual slam with orb features and nerf-realized mapping,‚Äù
in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 9400‚Äì9406.
[12] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¬®uhler, and G. Drettakis, ‚Äú3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.‚Äù ACM Trans. Graph.,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139‚Äì1, 2023.
[13] B. Huang, Z. Yu, A. Chen, A. Geiger, and S. Gao, ‚Äú2d gaussian splatting
for geometrically accurate radiance fields,‚Äù in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024
Conference Papers, 2024, pp. 1‚Äì11.
[14] P. Dai, J. Xu, W. Xie, X. Liu, H. Wang, and W. Xu, ‚ÄúHigh-quality
surface reconstruction using gaussian surfels,‚Äù in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024
Conference Papers, 2024, pp. 1‚Äì11.
[15] H. Matsuki, R. Murai, P. H. Kelly, and A. J. Davison, ‚ÄúGaussian splatting
slam,‚Äù in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 18 039‚Äì18 048.
[16] C. Yan, D. Qu, D. Xu, B. Zhao, Z. Wang, D. Wang, and X. Li, ‚ÄúGs-
slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaussian splatting,‚Äù in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 19 595‚Äì19 604.
[17] Y. Li, C. Lyu, Y. Di, G. Zhai, G. H. Lee, and F. Tombari, ‚ÄúGeogaussian:
Geometry-aware gaussian splatting for scene rendering,‚Äù arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.11324, 2024.
[18] Z. Zhu, Y. Wei, R. Lu, C. Xu, X. Le, B. Zheng, C. Yan, and F. Xu,
‚ÄúIndoor scene reconstruction using a rotating device and multiple rgb-
d cameras,‚Äù IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement,
vol. 73, pp. 1‚Äì11, 2024.
[19] J. Engel, T. Sch¬®ops, and D. Cremers, ‚ÄúLsd-slam: Large-scale direct
monocular slam,‚Äù in European conference on computer vision. Springer,
2014, pp. 834‚Äì849.
[20] Y. Li, R. Yunus, N. Brasch, N. Navab, and F. Tombari, ‚ÄúRgb-d slam
with structural regularities,‚Äù in 2021 IEEE international conference on
Robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 11 581‚Äì11 587.
[21] T. Schops, T. Sattler, and M. Pollefeys, ‚ÄúBad slam: Bundle adjusted
direct rgb-d slam,‚Äù in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2019, pp. 134‚Äì144.
[22] Q. Fu, H. Yu, X. Wang, Z. Yang, Y. He, H. Zhang, and A. Mian, ‚ÄúFast
orb-slam without keypoint descriptors,‚Äù IEEE transactions on image
processing, vol. 31, pp. 1433‚Äì1446, 2021.
[23] R. Gomez-Ojeda, F.-A. Moreno, D. Zuniga-No¬®el, D. Scaramuzza, and
J. Gonzalez-Jimenez, ‚ÄúPl-slam: A stereo slam system through the com-
bination of points and line segments,‚Äù IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 734‚Äì746, 2019.
[24] B. Gong, Z. Zhu, C. Yan, Z. Shi, and F. Xu, ‚ÄúPlanefusion: Real-time
indoor scene reconstruction with planar prior,‚Äù IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 28, no. 12, pp. 4671‚Äì4684,
2021.
[25] A. Rosinol, M. Abate, Y. Chang, and L. Carlone, ‚ÄúKimera: an open-
source library for real-time metric-semantic localization and mapping,‚Äù
in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 1689‚Äì1696.
[26] T. Whelan, S. Leutenegger, R. F. Salas-Moreno, B. Glocker, and A. J.
Davison, ‚ÄúElasticfusion: Dense slam without a pose graph.‚Äù in Robotics:
science and systems, vol. 11.
Rome, Italy, 2015, p. 3.
[27] A. Dai, M. Nie√üner, M. Zollh¬®ofer, S. Izadi, and C. Theobalt, ‚ÄúBundle-
fusion: Real-time globally consistent 3d reconstruction using on-the-fly
surface reintegration,‚Äù ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), vol. 36,
no. 4, p. 1, 2017.
[28] V. A. Prisacariu, O. K¬®ahler, S. Golodetz, M. Sapienza, T. Cavallari, P. H.
Torr, and D. W. Murray, ‚ÄúInfinitam v3: A framework for large-scale
3d reconstruction with loop closure,‚Äù arXiv preprint arXiv:1708.00783,
2017.
[29] R. A. Newcombe, D. Fox, and S. M. Seitz, ‚ÄúDynamicfusion: Recon-
struction and tracking of non-rigid scenes in real-time,‚Äù in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2015, pp. 343‚Äì352.
[30] J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm, ‚ÄúStructure-from-motion revisited,‚Äù
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2016, pp. 4104‚Äì4113.
[31] H. Cui, X. Gao, and S. Shen, ‚ÄúMcsfm: multi-camera-based incremen-
tal structure-from-motion,‚Äù IEEE Transactions on Image Processing,
vol. 32, pp. 6441‚Äì6456, 2023.
[32] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¬®uhler, and G. Drettakis, ‚Äú3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,‚Äù ACM Transactions
on
Graphics,
vol.
42,
no.
4,
July
2023.
[Online].
Available:
https://repo-sam.inria.fr/fungraph/3d-gaussian-splatting/
[33] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, ‚ÄúSplatam: Splat, track and map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam,‚Äù in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
[34] S. Ha, J. Yeon, and H. Yu, ‚ÄúRgbd gs-icp slam,‚Äù 2024. [Online].
Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2403.12550
[35] S. Yang, B. Li, Y.-P. Cao, H. Fu, Y.-K. Lai, L. Kobbelt, and S.-M. Hu,
‚ÄúNoise-resilient reconstruction of panoramas and 3d scenes using robot-
mounted unsynchronized commodity rgb-d cameras,‚Äù ACM Transactions
on Graphics (TOG), vol. 39, no. 5, pp. 1‚Äì15, 2020.
[36] H. Matsuki, R. Murai, P. H. J. Kelly, and A. J. Davison, ‚ÄúGaussian
Splatting SLAM,‚Äù in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
[37] V. Yugay, Y. Li, T. Gevers, and M. R. Oswald, ‚ÄúGaussian-slam: Photo-
realistic dense slam with gaussian splatting,‚Äù 2023.
[38] A. Handa, T. Whelan, J. McDonald, and A. J. Davison, ‚ÄúA benchmark
for rgb-d visual odometry, 3d reconstruction and slam,‚Äù in 2014 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2014, pp.
1524‚Äì1531.
