<!-- page 1 -->
GS-LIVM: Real-Time Photo-Realistic LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Mapping with
Gaussian Splatting
Yusen Xie1
Zhenmin Huang2
Jin Wu2
Jun Ma1,2
1Robotics and Autonomous Systems Thrust
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology (Guangzhou)
2Department of Electronic and Computer Engineering
The Hong Kong University of Science and Technology
{yxie827@connect.hkust-gz.edu.cn; zhuangdf@connect.ust.hk;
jwucp@connect.ust.hk; jun.ma@ust.hk}
https://github.com/xieyuser/GS-LIVM
Figure 1. Illustration of our photo-realistic mapping results on Botanic Garden Sequence 1018 13. The pink dashed line represents the
running trajectory, with the entire trajectory being approximately 200 meters. The green square is the starting point and the red pentagram
is the endpoint. The rendering images at different locations are shown in the corners. The quantitative metrics are shown in the table.
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce GS-LIVM, a real-time photo-
realistic LiDAR-Inertial-Visual mapping framework with
Gaussian Splatting tailored for outdoor scenes.
Com-
pared to existing methods based on Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), our approach
enables real-time photo-realistic mapping while ensuring
high-quality image rendering in large-scale unbounded out-
door environments.
In this work, Gaussian Process Re-
gression (GPR) is employed to mitigate the issues result-
ing from sparse and unevenly distributed LiDAR observa-
tions. The voxel-based 3D Gaussians map representation
facilitates real-time dense mapping in large outdoor envi-
ronments with acceleration governed by custom CUDA ker-
nels.
Moreover, the overall framework is designed in a
covariance-centered manner, where the estimated covari-
ance is used to initialize the scale and rotation of 3D Gaus-
sians, as well as update the parameters of the GPR. We eval-
uate our algorithm on several outdoor datasets, and the re-
sults demonstrate that our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance in terms of mapping efficiency and rendering
quality. The source code is available on GitHub .
1. Introduction
Over the past two decades, simultaneous localization and
mapping (SLAM) has emerged as a cornerstone technol-
ogy underpinning advancements in robotics [6] and au-
tonomous driving [4, 5].
Typically, it relies on sensor
fusion techniques that leverage sparse feature representa-
tions [18, 19, 42, 43, 48, 52]. While effective in various con-
texts, these approaches have shown limitations in achieving
high-quality performance in 3D reconstruction and photo-
1
arXiv:2410.17084v1  [cs.RO]  18 Oct 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
realistic environmental rendering.
The landscape of re-
search in SLAM begins to shift with the advent of power-
ful neural scene representation techniques, notably Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) [22, 27] and 3D Gaussian Splat-
ting (3DGS) [12–14]. This paradigm shift leads to the de-
velopment of photo-realistic neural SLAM methods, which
greatly improve the fidelity of novel view-synthesis (NVS)
and environmental representation.
Despite these advancements, it leaves an open problem
in the application of these novel scene representation tech-
niques to large-scale unbounded outdoor scenes. Current
methods have demonstrated remarkable performance in in-
door settings utilizing RGB-D sensors [8, 12, 21, 35, 44, 49]
and monocular cameras [8, 21]. However, their applica-
bility to outdoor scenes, where data acquisition is gen-
erally performed through multi-line spinning LiDAR and
non-repetitive scanning LiDAR, is constrained. These con-
straints are further compounded by the uncertainty of point
cloud scanning trajectories, leading to uneven point cloud
distributions. Moreover, in outdoor SLAM scenarios, the
movement is predominantly unidirectional, which leads to
a growing bias towards the camera direction during the opti-
mization of 3D Gaussians [13, 21]. This directional bias re-
sults in a significant degradation of rendering quality when
observed from new viewpoints. Several studies [7, 16, 46,
54] have explored the integration of dense neural scene rep-
resentations with conventional SLAM frameworks for out-
door scenes, yet significant challenges are encountered. The
extensive optimization time required for offline mapping
can result in over-fitting of 3D Gaussian representations to
supervised information, yielding higher image evaluation
metrics from these specific viewpoints [7, 46, 54]. These
leads to both inefficient processing and compromised im-
age synthesis quality from new perspectives, highlighting
the complexities of developing effective and versatile out-
door SLAM systems.
With the aforementioned discussions as a backdrop,
we propose GS-LIVM to achieve real-time performance
on photo-realistic 3DGS reconstruction for large-scale un-
bounded outdoor scenes.
Our approach initiates with
tightly-coupled LiDAR-Inertial-Visual odometry [18, 48]
for precise state estimation and coordinate transformation
of colored point clouds. To address the issues of sparsity
and uneven distribution inherent in LiDAR point clouds,
we apply Gaussian Process Regression (GPR) [17, 28, 31]
to predict an evenly distributed point cloud as part of our
photo-realistic mapping process.
The covariance output
from the GPR module informs the update of GPR param-
eters and contributes to initializing scales and rotations of
3D Gaussian, which accelerates 3D Gaussian optimization
process. We further leverage LiDAR’s new observations of
the environment to iteratively update the parameters of GPR
and the structure of 3D Gaussians. By continuously refining
our framework with covariance estimates and image render-
ing data, we achieve high-quality 3D photo-realistic recon-
struction and photo-realistic rendering in outdoor scenes.
Figure 1 shows the results of our real-time photo-realistic
mapping in Botanic Garden 1018 13 sequence. To the best
knowledge of the authors, our development is the first real-
time photo-realistic SLAM framework tailored for LiDAR-
Inertial-Visual fusion applications in large-scale unbounded
outdoor scenes.
In this paper, our main contributions are summarized as
follows:
• We employ GPR within voxel-level (Voxel-GPR) to con-
struct a uniform point cloud mesh grid, which effectively
addresses sparse and unevenly distributed LiDAR obser-
vations.
Voxel-GPR facilitates the utilization of fewer
3D Gaussians than the original input without compro-
mising the performance, and this substantially reduces
GPU memory consumption and enhances the speed of 3D
Gaussians optimization.
• We develop a fast initialization technique for the scale and
rotation parameters of the 3D Gaussians, which enables
rapid convergence during map expansion. This approach
alleviates the decline in rendering quality resulting from
inadequate optimization iterations during fast movements
of the sensor platform.
• We devise an iterative optimization framework centered
on variance, for iteratively reducing noise and hastening
the convergence of the Voxel-GPR module. Moreover,
leveraging new observations from LiDAR, we introduce
a structural similarity regularization term to the existing
3D Gaussian map, thus bolstering the robustness of NVS.
• We conduct thorough validation on various outdoor
SLAM datasets using various LiDAR, IMU, and camera
configurations. The results showcase the superior capa-
bility of our algorithm to achieve real-time photo-realistic
mapping in large-scale unbounded outdoor scenes while
ensuring high-quality image rendering.
2. Related Works
Conventional Multi-Sensor Fusion SLAM. Conventional
SLAM systems typically rely on filter-based [42, 43, 52, 53]
or graph-based [32, 33, 50] solvers for ego state estima-
tion, which generally allows for robust, accurate, and fast
localization performance. In recent developments, LiDAR-
Inertial-Visual SLAM systems have emerged as a versa-
tile framework, which offers high-rate motion compensa-
tion, precise geometric structures, and rich texture infor-
mation [18, 19, 33, 52] that effectively mitigate issues in
challenging environments. Nevertheless, these methods still
primarily concentrate on geometric mapping, which limits
their capacity for achieving photometric image rendering.
NeRF-based SLAM. NeRF uses a multi-layer percep-
tion (MLP) neural network and volume rendering to implic-
2

<!-- page 3 -->
itly learn a 3D scene, with the network storing the structural
information of the scene [22]. However, this approach leads
to a significant increase in computational time in large-
scale environments. Moreover, the primary drawback of
the NeRF-based method is its extremely poor generalization
capability across different scenes. Some methods integrate
voxel [47, 55] or hash-tri-plane [11, 29, 38] representations
with MLPs as a way to construct maps, enabling recon-
struction over larger areas. NeRF-SLAM [27] utilizes the
dense depth maps estimated from DROID-SLAM [37] as
additional information to supervise the training of Instant-
NGP [23]. H2-Mapping [9] and H3-Mapping [10] utilize hi-
erarchical hybrid representations to enhance the reconstruc-
tion and achieve impressive performance in indoor scenes
via RGB-D camera.
NeRF-LOAM [3] and EINR [45]
gains better performance in large-scale environments, but
they mainly focus on geometry structure reconstruction in-
stead of photo-realistic rendering. Despite these aforemen-
tioned advancements, implicit representation methods still
face challenges regarding real-time performance, particu-
larly in outdoor scenes.
3DGS-based SLAM. To improve computational effi-
ciency, 3DGS utilizes sphere-based explicit scene represen-
tation, replacing time-consuming ray-based volume render-
ing with fast rasterization. This method accelerates NVS
and produces promising rendering quality. Aimed at photo-
realistic mapping, methods like SplaTAM [12], Gaussian-
SLAM [49], and GS-SLAM [44] showcase the substantial
benefits of 3DGS over conventional map representations in
SLAM tasks. MonoGS [21] utilizes a single RGB sensor
and introduces geometric regularization to address ambigu-
ities in incremental reconstruction, demonstrating promis-
ing results with monocular images in small-scale scenes.
Additionally, Photo-SLAM [8] leverages the classical vi-
sual odometry method ORB-SLAM3 [1] for precise state
estimation and constructs a hybrid Gaussian map integrated
with ORB features. They typically rely on RGB-D/RGB
camera sensors to achieve photo-realistic reconstruction in
indoor scene. On the other hand, DrivingGaussian [54],
StreetGaussian [46], and LIV-GaussMap [7] realize pho-
torealistic reconstructions based on multi-sensor fusion in
ourdoor scenes.
However, these approaches are all of-
fline methods. Gaussian-LIC [16], developed within a fu-
sion SLAM framework [15], claims to provide high-quality
photo-realistic mapping performance.
However, it is re-
ported that each keyframe iteration takes about one second,
which is far slower than the 100 milliseconds requiring for
real-time mapping. Additionally, it struggles to process en-
tire outdoor sequences due to GPU memory overflow, as it
employs millions of 3D Gaussians to reconstruct the com-
plete scene. MM3DGS SLAM [36], MM-Gaussian [40],
and HGS-Mapping [41] complete multi-modal sensor fu-
sion reconstruction in urban scenes. However, these meth-
Figure 2. The system processes input from point cloud data ob-
tained from LiDAR, motion data from an IMU, and monocular
color image captured by a camera. In the tracking thread, the
ESIKF algorithm is employed to track motion, producing odome-
try output at the IMU frequency. In the mapping thread, the ren-
dered color point cloud is utilized for Voxel-GPR, after which the
initialized 3D Gaussian data is integrated into a dense 3D Gaussian
map for rendering optimization. The final output is a high-quality,
dense 3D Gaussian map. Notations C, D, and S denote the raster-
ized color image, depth image, and silhouette image, respectively.
⊕represents the global hash-colored map, which provides neigh-
boring query points for the recently scanned LiDAR points.
ods are similar to offline method [7], which extend the op-
timization iteration to enhance performance metrics, yet it
remains insufficient for achieving real-time capabilities.
3. Methodology
In this work, we rely on the online LiDAR-Inertial-Visual
fusion SLAM framework [18, 48] for robust state estima-
tion and point coordinate transformation. To address spar-
sity issue of LiDAR point cloud, we introduce voxel-level
GPR (Voxel-GPR) in Section 3.1. In Section 3.2, we in-
troduce a method to estimate the initial scale and rotation
parameters of 3D Gaussians based on Voxel-GPR to speed
up the convergence. Following this, we present our itera-
tive system in Section 3.3, which encompasses updates to
the GPR parameters, map expansion, similarity regulariza-
tion, and implementation details. The brief overview of our
framework is illustarted in Figure 2.
3.1. Voxel-Level Gaussian Process Regression
A series of studies [7, 16, 53] demonstrate that uneven
point clouds in the 3DGS framework lead to memory in-
efficiency and reduced optimization. Offline methods can
directly utilize original point clouds since occlusion and in-
sufficient supervision are managed by density control algo-
rithms. However, in dynamic scenarios, rapid perspective
changes cause uneven gradient supervision, hindering quick
convergence (refer to ablation experiments in Section 4.4).
To address this, we introduce Voxel-GPR, which employs
GPR to uniformly transform point clouds at the voxel level,
enhancing the efficiency of 3D Gaussian map optimization.
For each scanned voxel in continuous frame, we utilize
3

<!-- page 4 -->
Algorithm 1: Voxel-GPR for processing single-
frame collected point clouds.
Input: Pf , C (Global Stored Point Cloud in Voxels)
Output: Pf∗
1 Supdated ←ALG.STORE(Pf , C)
2 (CUDABatched) for Hp in Supdated do
3
Pα = Supdated[Hp] →points
4
Vα = ALG.PCA(Pα)
5
switch Vα do
6
case X do
7
fα ←Px
α, xα ←

Py
α
Pz
α
⊤
8
xα∗←ALG.MESHGRID( Py
α∗,Pz
α∗)
9
case Y do
10
fα ←Py
α, xα ←

Pz
α
Px
α
⊤
11
xα∗←ALG.MESHGRID( Pz
α∗,Px
α∗)
12
case Z do
13
fα ←Pz
α, xα ←

Px
α
Py
α
⊤
14
xα∗←ALG.MESHGRID( Px
α∗,Py
α∗)
15
end
16
f[Hp] ←fα, x[Hp] ←xα, x∗[Hp] ←xα∗
17 end
18 (CUDABatched) K ←κ(x,x∗)
19 (CUDABatched) K∗←κ(x,x∗)
20 (CUDABatched) K∗∗←κ(x∗,x∗)
21 (CUDABatched) µ∗,Σ∗←ALG.SOLVE (3)
22 Pf∗= (f∗, x∗)
Voxel-GPR for point cloud completion and to generate an
evenly sampled point cloud Pf∗based on the uneven in-
put Pf . The pseudocode for Voxel-GPR implemented using
CUDA is provided in Algorithm 1. We first apply a hash
function to Pf and simultaneously record the visited voxel
hash points as Supdated. The pseudocode from Pf to Supdated
in line 1 is introduced in the supplementary materials. Then
we perform Voxel-GPR processing on each voxel parallelly.
For the αth voxel, when the number of points contained
is sufficient to meet the point count threshold τ, we conduct
Voxel-GPR operations on it. Let n denote the number of
points in Pα. Pα ∈Rn×3 represents the training subset of
point clouds contained within this voxel. Inspired by [28],
we compute the eigenvector of point cloud Pα by princi-
pal component analysis (PCA), and then determine the an-
gles between Vα and the three axes X, Y, and Z, respec-
tively. Then, the axis with the smallest angle is defined as
the value axis and the projection of Pα onto the value axis
is denoted as fα (fα ∈Rn), while the other two axes are con-
sidered as the parameter axes and the projection of Pα onto
the parameters axis is denoted as xα (xα ∈Rn×2). Note
that fα = yα +ε, where yα is noise-free observations, noise
ε ∼N(0,σ2) is independently added to each observation,
where σ is the pre-defined sensor variance (or the updated
variance from Section 3.3). Pα in αth voxel is assigned a
random variable fα and the joint distribution is given by
p(fα | xα) ∼N(fα | µα,Kα)
(1)
where µα is the mean value in each dimension.
Kα =
κ(xα,xα) and κ is a positive definite kernel function de-
fined as κ (xαi,xα j) = exp
 −λ(xαi −xα j)(xαi −xα j)⊤
,
which is a scale value representing the distance between
variable xαi and xα j, and λ is a constant (λ = 1 in our ex-
periments).
(a)
(b)
Figure 3. (a) Illustration of Voxel-GPR for the αth voxel involves
processing voxels that contain a sufficient number τ of points. The
depicted surface illustrates the distribution of the predicted points,
where the variance decreases from areas marked in red to those in
green. (b) Illustration depicts the initialization of 3D Gaussians.
As indicated by the curved orange arrow, we consider the points
within the neighborhood (black dash region). The green spheres
represent the fitted 3D Gaussians.
Each side of αth voxel consists of ns intervals. To gener-
ate the point cloud Pα∗∈Rn∗×3 (n∗= n2
s), we first generate
evenly spaced mesh grids xα on the plane determined by pa-
rameter axes, which are then used as queries to the Voxel-
GPR module to obtain fα∗∈Rn∗along value axis. Follow-
ing the definition of a general GPR problem [26], the joint
distribution of observations fα and predictions fα∗is again
a Gaussian distribution which can be partitioned into
 fα
fα∗

∼N

0,
 Kα +σ2I
Kα∗
K⊤
α∗
Kα∗∗

(2)
where Kα∗= κ(xα, xα∗) and Kα∗∗= κ(xα∗, xα∗). With
n training data and n∗prediction data, the predicted µα∗
and Σα∗are
p(fα∗| xα∗,xα,fα) = N (fα∗| µα∗, Σα∗)
fα∗= µα∗= K⊤
α∗(Kα +σ2I)−1fα
(3)
Σα∗= Kα∗∗−K⊤
α∗(Kα +σ2I)−1Kα∗.
The prediction points Pα∗is given by (fα∗, xα∗), where
xα∗is the evenly spaced mesh grids.
Moreover, Σα∗∈
Rn∗×n∗is the estimated variance of Pα∗. The prediction
Pα∗and Σα∗serve as representatives for αth voxel and will
be included in the initialization of the 3D Gaussians in Sec-
tion 3.2. Results of Voxel-GPR is depicted in Figure 3(a).
4

<!-- page 5 -->
By leveraging CUDA’s parallelization capabilities, we
efficiently handle hundreds or thousands of voxels simul-
taneously, even in large-scale map expansions, it takes
less than 30 milliseconds. The pseudocode for the CUDA
batched algorithm ALG.SOLVE in line 21 of the Voxel-
GPR algorithm is provided in the supplementary materials.
3.2. Efficient Initialization of 3D Gaussians
In our implementation of map management, each Gaussian
Mk is defined by position pk ∈R3, covariance matrix Φk ∈
R3×3, opacity Λk ∈R, and zero degree Spherical Harmonics
(SHs) Yk ∈R3 per color channel. The scene of our dense
3DGS map M is
M = {(Mk : pk,Φk,Λk,Yk) | k = 1,2,··· ,N}
(4)
where N is the number of 3D Gaussians in the dense map.
In the original implementation of 3DGS [13], 3D covari-
ance matrix Φk ∈R3×3 of kth Gaussian is initiated as
Φk = RkSkS⊤
k R⊤
k
(5)
where Sk is the scale vector calculated by finding the nearest
distance to surrounding neighbors as described in [30], and
Rk is uniformly initialized as a constant and stored as a 4D
quaternion. Benefited from Voxel-GPR, we develop an effi-
cient initialization algorithm for calculating the covariance
matrix Φk of Mk.
In Section 3.1, the prediction side interval of the αth
voxel is ns, and the prediction results within this voxel can
be divided into ns × ns subgrids. In our actual code im-
plementation, we predict the surrounding nr neighboring
points for each interval additionally. Therefore, the number
of predicted points on each side of the αth voxel is ns ×nr.
Next, we will discuss the algorithm to initialize 3D Gaus-
sians for each subgrid.
Points in the βth subgrid are defined as Gβ = {(Pα
f∗)β
i ∈
R3, wβ
i ∈R}, where wβ
i is the weight coefficient for the ith
point in the βth grid, given by wβ
i = 1/Σα
∗i, and Σα
∗i is the
covariance for the ith point. We use a sphere to regress Gβ
in this subgrid, as shown in Figure 3(b). Following this, the
position pβ of the initial 3D Gaussian in this βth subgrid is
given by
pβ = ∑
n2r
i=1(Pα
f∗)β
i ·wβ
i
∑
n2r
i=1 wβ
i
(6)
For scale and rotation parameters of each Gaussian, we fit
neighbor by calculating the covariance matrix Φβ in βth
grid as
Φβ =
Q⊤·diag(wβ
1 ,wβ
2 ,...,wβ
n2r )·Q
∑
n2r
i=1 wβ
i
(7)
where Q = (Pα
f∗)β −pβ. The calculation of Q described
above involves subtracting pβ from each row of (Pα
f∗)β, re-
sulting in Q having a dimension of n2
r ×3. The scale param-
eter Sβ in βth subgrid is given by
Sβ = diag(Φβ)
(8)
and Rβ of this 3D Gaussian is set to identity quaternion. Sβ
and Rβ are used to estimate initial shape of 3D Gaussians.
For color information, we reproject pβ to current image by
camera extrinsic, grab the color in this RGB image, and
calculate the initial SHs Y.
By employing the aforementioned methods, we compute
the parameters of ns×ns Gaussians for the αth voxel. These
3D Gaussians serve as representatives of αth voxel in space.
Experimental results demonstrate that this approach signif-
icantly accelerates the optimization efficiency of 3D Gaus-
sians while ensuring high-quality rendering.
3.3. Iterative photo-realistic Mapping Framework
Map Expansion and Covariance Update. For the voxels
in the scene, we categorize them into four types: (a) un-
explored voxels or those that do not meet the processing
threshold τ (Figure 4(a)); (b) voxels that meet the process-
ing threshold but have not yet been added to the map (Fig-
ure 4(b)); (c) voxels that are already included in the map
but are still in an active state, meaning that their variance
has not yet reached the convergence threshold η and they
requires further Voxel-GPR optimization (Figure 4(c)); and
(d) voxels that have completed convergence in Voxel-GPR
module (Figure 4(d)).
(a)
(b)
(c)
(d)
Figure 4. This illustration presents four types of voxels in hash
voxel map. Small dots marked in black represent new scanned
points cloud from LiDAR, with their variance corresponding to the
sensor’s inherent noise. Larger dots highlighted in dark blue are
from the meshgrid, poised for processing via Voxel-GPR, while
the small dots in light blue have undergone variance updates. The
ellipsoids are shaded in various colors, where each color signifies
the magnitude of their variance.
To increase the processing speed, we do not process
types (a) and (d) by the Voxel-GPR module. Our main focus
is on processing the type (b) voxels, after which we expand
these updated voxels to the dense map M. The expansion
is determined by whether the number of updated voxels ex-
ceeds a certain threshold, which can be found in the details
of our code. For type (c) voxels, we update the original
variance with the estimated value from the previous itera-
tion. We then conduct the Voxel-GPR calculation again by
5

<!-- page 6 -->
stacking new observation points with the original points un-
til the Voxel-GPR process converges for this voxel, at which
point it transits to type (d).
Rendering and Delta Depth Similarity Loss. Similar
to [13], we rasterize 3D Gaussians M to the observation
camera with pose T and camera intrinsic π. The color of
one pixel is rendered by N ordered 3D Gaussians in depth,
photometric image C is rendered as
C = ∑
i∈N
ciαi
i−1
∏
j=1
(1−αj)
(9)
where ci represents color obtained by learned SHs coeffi-
cients and αi is the density computed by multiplying 2D
covariance σ′ with opacity Λi. We also rasterize per-pixel
depth D and silhouette image S to determine that if a pixel
contains information from the current map by α-blending
rendering similar to [12].
In the delta depth similarity loss, we rasterize two
depth image (DFc, DFc+1) and two silhouette image (SFc,
SFc+1) to calculate delta depth similarity loss Ld between
relative camera Fc = {DFc,SFc,πFc,TFc} and Fc+1 =
{DFc+1,SFc+1,πFc+1,TFc+1}. Ld supervises the optimiza-
tion of the 3DGS dense map through gradient back propa-
gation. Ld is defined as
Ld = ∥SFc+1 ◦DFc+1 −πFc+1TFc+1T−1
Fc π−1
Fc (SFc ◦DFc)∥1
(10)
where ◦denotes the operation applied element-wisely to the
rendered depth image.
Structure Similarity Loss. For the scanned point cloud
in the latest frame Pf , we introduce the similarity loss Lp to
accelerate the optimization process. This loss measures the
Euclidean distance between the current 3D Gaussian map
M = {Mk : pk ∈R3,Sk ∈R3) | k = 1,2,··· ,m} and the
latest scanned point cloud frame Pf , m and n are the number
of spheres and points, respectively. For each scanned point
within the frame, we identify the nearest 3D Gaussian and
calculate the Euclidean distance. Structure similarity loss
Lp is defined as the mean of the nearest distances calculate
by all points in Pf . Lp can be expressed as
Lp = 1
n
n
∑
j=0
min
k∈{1,2,...,m}
 ∥(Pf )j −pk∥2 −¯Sk

(11)
where ¯Sk is the mean value of kth 3D Gaussian scaling pa-
rameters.
Training. The mapping thread in our system maintains
a dense map composed of 3D Gaussians M and a contin-
uous camera queue. We separate this camera queue into
two parts: current visited camera window Qcurr and histor-
ical camera queue Qhist. Qcurr consists of T latested added
cameras. We select kcurr frames Fcurr for map optimization
during each iteration. To prevent catastrophic forgetting of
historical data, each iteration also randomly selects khist his-
torical frame Fhist from Qhist for joint optimization. Raster-
ized image loss, delta depth similarity loss, and structure
similarity loss will be iterated to optimize the 3D Gaussian
dense map by minimizing
L = (1−λs)∥C −Cgt∥1 +λsLssim
+λd ∑F∗∈{Fcurr, Fhist} Ld(F∗, F∗+1)+λpLp
(12)
where Cgt and C are the observed image and the image ren-
dered by (9), respectively. Lssim is an SSIM [39] term. Ld
is the delta depth similarity loss calculated by kcurr current
frames Fcurr and khist historical frame Fhist in (10). Lp is
a structure similarity loss calculated in (11). λs, λd, and λp
are weights of SSIM loss, structure similarity loss, and delta
depth similarity loss, respectively.
4. Experiments
In this section, we first introduce the experimental setup in
Section 4.1, including datasets, baseline, and parameter set-
tings, etc. Then in Section 4.2, we mainly compare the ren-
der performance of dense maps. Section 4.3 provides the
analysis of mapping time and GPU memory consumption
of the framework. Section 4.4 shows ablation experiments
of the proposed framework.
4.1. Experiment Setup
Datasets. We carry out experiments on four public LiDAR
Inertial-Visual datasets, including R3LIVE [18] dataset,
FAST-LIVO [52] dataset, NTU-VIRAL [24] dataset, and
Botanic Garden [20] dataset.
The first two datasets are
collected within the campuses of HKU and HKUST using
a handheld device equipped with a Livox Avia LiDAR at
10 Hz and its builtin IMU at 200 Hz, and a 15 Hz RGB cam-
era (image resolution: 640×512). The NTU-VIRAL [24]
dataset is collect by Ouster-16 multi-line spinning LiDAR,
which is more sparse than Livox LiDAR and the image res-
olution is 752×480. The Botanic Garden [20] dataset is
collected by a wheeled robot traversing through a luxuriant
botanic garden, point clouds from both multi-line spinning
LiDAR Velodyne VLP-16 and Livox Avia LiDAR are col-
lected and image resolution is 480×300.
Baselines and Metrics. We compare our method with the
existing state-of-the-art NeRF-based dense visual SLAM
NeRF-SLAM [27] and 3DGS-based SLAM [21]. Addition-
ally, the original offline implementation 3DGS [13] is also
used as a baseline for comparison. It should be noted that
RGB-D methods [8, 12, 35, 44, 49] are not suitable in out-
door scenes due to the poor performance, so these methods
are not included in comparison. We evaluate the render-
ing performance using PSNR, SSIM [39], and LPIPS [51].
Note that we run all the baselines on datasets and calculate
the mean metric among all observation images.
6

<!-- page 7 -->
Table 1.
Quantitative rendering performance comparison between radiance-field-based SLAM method [27], 3DGS-based SLAM
method [21], and original offline optimization [13] on R3LIVE dataset [18], FAST-LIVO dataset [52], NTU dataset [24], and Botanic
Garden dataset [20]. The results ranked from best to worst are highlighted as first , second , and third .
Nerf-SLAM [27]
MonoGS [21]
3DGS [13]
Ours
Sequence
LiDAR
Type
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
hku campus seq 00
Livox Avia
13.232
0.410
0.653
12.142
0.368
0.608
21.744
0.719
0.302
22.430
0.719
0.247
Visual Challenge
Livox Avia
12.981
0.408
0.592
13.478
0.579
0.414
18.552
0.545
0.378
21.806
0.717
0.289
eee 02
Ouster-16
8.316
0.320
0.693
11.632
0.407
0.514
20.388
0.686
0.382
20.718
0.700
0.319
1005 00
Livox Avia
9.790
0.362
0.750
14.563
0.602
0.406
22.167
0.657
0.380
21.123
0.679
0.258
Implementation Details. Our framework is implemented
by CUDA/C++ using the LibTorch framework [2] under
Robot Operating System (ROS) [25], incorporating CUDA
code for Gaussian Splatting and trained on a desktop PC
with a 5.50 GHz Intel Core i9-13900HX CPU, 64 GB RAM,
and a NVIDIA RTX 4060 Laptop 8 GB GPU. In all sce-
quences, the hyprparameters used in our experiments are
listed in the supplementary materials.
Figure 5. Illustration of the rendering performance on the NeRF-
based method [27] and the 3DGS-based method [13, 21] on se-
quence hkust campus seq 00, Visual Challenge, eee 03, 1005 00,
respectively.
4.2. Rendering Evalution
We conduct rendering comparisons using the 3DGS origi-
nal implementation [13], NeRF-SLAM [27], and Gaussian
Splatting SLAM [21]. All of these methods rely solely on
images as supervision. Due to limitations in GPU memory
and poor tracking performance, these methods [13, 21, 27]
are unable to complete the reconstruction task of the en-
tire environment. To facilitate comparison, we reduce the
size of the reconstruction scene and use camera poses and
depth maps calculated by COLMAP [30] as input for meth-
ods [13, 21, 27]. The camera pose in our framework is esti-
mated by multi-sensor fusion odometry. The reconstruction
sequence in the scene is limited to within 100 frames, and
the reconstruction time is limited to within 5 minutes. The
comparision of rendering performance are shown in Table 1
and Figure 5. It can be observed that due to the strict time
constraints, the reconstruction results of NeRF-SLAM [27]
and MonoGS [21] are relatively poor. Although 3DGS per-
forms well in some scenes, its offline optimization performs
poorly on NVS. More details of rendering experiments can
be found in the supplementary materials.
Figure 6. Time consumption and GPU memory consumption on
Botanic Garden sequence 1018 13.
Table 2. Duration (DT), mapping Time (MT), count of 3D Gaus-
sians, and maximum memory cost (Mem) in photo-realistic map-
ping in different sequences.
Sequence
DT (s)
MT (s)
Count
Mem (Mb)
hku campus seq 00
202
202
1,209,666
2495
Visual Challenge
162
162
353,334
1353
eee 02
321
321
758,213
1523
1005 00
611
612
2,177,464
3492
4.3. Runtime and Memory Cost Analysis
The real-time performance criterion in our experiments is
that all collected image frames are processed, meaning that
the processing time for each frame t should satisfy t <=
D/C, where D is the duration of collected dataset and C is
the size of added tracking camera queue. The fill-between
plot in mapping time consumption over time in the Botanic
Garden sequence 1018 13 (duration: 208 s) is shown in
Figure 6. It can be observed that as time progresses, the
overall system consumption time remains mostly below the
real-time limit. The time consumption graph on longer se-
quences can be found in the supplementary materials.
7

<!-- page 8 -->
As the mapping process advances, the consumption of
GPU memory escalates with an increasing number of 3D
Gaussians. All sequences can be fully processed through
photo-realistic mapping on an 8 GB GPU when ns = 3. Ta-
ble 2 outlines experiment results on various sequences.
4.4. Ablation Study
We conduct an ablation study on the Voxel-GPR module
and the 3D Gaussians initialization algorithm module in our
system, as well as the structure similarity loss and the delta
depth similarity loss, as shown in Figure 7. It can be seen
that the construction of 3D Gaussians based on the origi-
nal point cloud (Figure 7(a)) does not consider the geomet-
ric dependencies in environment, which can lead to uneven
distributions of 3D Gaussians. Moreover, achieving the de-
sired optimization effect with Figure 7(b) and Figure 7(c)
takes 1.3 times longer, indicating that a reasonable initial-
ization method can accelerate the convergence. By adding
the structure similarity loss in Figure 7(d) and the delta
depth similarity loss in Figure 7(e) based on Figure 7(c),
the representation of details in the environment is enhanced,
resulting in images that are closer to real collected images.
Quantitative ablation experiments are shown in Table 3,
mainly comparing the differences in mapping time and
mean rendering metrics on all observation images of dif-
ferent hyper parameters. The first and second rows of each
sequence mainly compare the influence of parameter η on
mapping time and rendering metrics. Setting an appropri-
ate value for η can significantly impact mapping time for
different LiDAR configurations. A smaller η value results
in longer mapping times, but does not provide a clear im-
provement in render metrics. The 2nd to 4th rows com-
pare the effects of structure similarity loss and delta depth
loss on render metrics. It can be observed that adding these
two losses does not impact mapping time but can enhance
render metrics. The 4th and 5th rows in Table 3 and Fig-
ure 7(e)- Figure 7(f) compare the impact of ns on the results.
In smaller scenes (e.g., 1018 13 in Botanic Garden [20],
hkust campus seq 00 in R3LIVE [18]), ns does not affect
mapping time and significantly improves render metrics, but
in larger scenes (e.g., hku main building in R3LIVE [18]),
ns may consume excessive time and GPU memory. This
illustrates the trade-off between accuracy and speed. Ex-
panded ablation experiments on more sequences can be ref-
ered in the supplementary materials.
5. Conclusion
In conclusion, this paper presents GS-LIVM, a novel
real-time photo-realistic LiDAR-Inertial-Visual mapping
framework with Gaussian Splatting.
Our approach en-
ables real-time photo-realistic mapping while ensuring
high-quality image rendering in large, uncontrolled out-
door scenes.
In this work, we leverage Voxle-GPR to
(a) w/o Voxel-GPR
(b) w/o our initialization
(c) w/o SS
(d) w/o DDS
(e) Full (ns = 4)
(f) Full (ns = 3)
Figure 7. (a) Similar to [7, 16], each collected point corresponds
to a generated 3D Gaussian. (b) The use of a uniform initialization
method. (c) There is no structural similarity loss (SS) for the sin-
gle frame point cloud. (d) There is no delta depth similarity loss
(DDS) for the relative frame. (e) The combined results of all the
modules and losses are presented. Note that, ns = 4 in (a-e). (f)
The combined results of all the modules (ns = 3).
Table 3. Quantitative ablation comparison of hyperparameters in
various sequences, such as duration (DT), mapping time (MT),
interval of 3D Gaussians in voxel side ns, convergence variance
of Voxel-GPR η, structure similarity loss (SS), and delta depth
similarity loss (DDS).
Sequence
DT (s)
MT (s)
ns
η
SS
DDS
PSNR
SSIM
1240
3
0.1
✗
✗
18.494
0.637
202
3
0.3
✗
✗
19.005
0.647
202
3
0.3
✓
✗
19.944
0.648
202
3
0.3
✓
✓
19.292
0.640
hku
campus
seq 00
202
202
4
0.3
✓
✓
20.143
0.672
891
3
0.2
✗
✗
14.754
0.449
208
3
0.3
✗
✗
16.039
0.475
208
3
0.3
✓
✗
15.988
0.488
208
3
0.3
✓
✓
15.732
0.461
1018 13
208
208
4
0.3
✓
✓
17.982
0.493
tackle the sparsity issue in LiDAR point clouds.
The
voxel-based 3D Gaussians map representation facilitates
real-time photo-realistic mapping in large-scale unbounded
outdoor scenes with the acceleration provided by custom
CUDA kernels. Additionally, the framework is structured
in a covariance-centered manner, where the estimated
covariance is utilized to initialize the scale and rotation
of 3D Gaussian, as well as update the parameters of the
Voxle-GPR. Experimental evaluations on various outdoor
datasets validate that our algorithm achieves state-of-the-art
performance in terms of mapping efficiency and rendering
quality. Moreover, the source code is publicly available,
facilitating further research and development in this area.
8

<!-- page 9 -->
References
[1] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J G´omez Rodr´ıguez,
Jos´e MM Montiel, and Juan D Tard´os. ORB-SLAM3: An
Accurate Open-source Library for Visual, Visual-Inertial,
and Multimap SLAM.
IEEE Trans. Robot., 37(6):1874–
1890, 2021. 3
[2] PyTorch Contributors. Installing C++ Distributions of Py-
Torch, 2024. 7
[3] Junyuan Deng, Xieyuanli Chen, Songpengcheng Xia, Zhen
Sun, Guoqing Liu, Wenxian Yu, and Ling Pei.
NeRF-
LOAM: Neural Implicit Representation for Large-Scale In-
cremental LiDAR Odometry and Mapping.
In Int. Conf.
Comput. Vis., pages 8184–8193, 2023. 3
[4] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, and Raquel Urtasun. Are We
Ready for Autonomous Driving? The KITTI Vision Bench-
mark Suite.
In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
2012. 1
[5] Andreas Geiger, Philip Lenz, Christoph Stiller, and Raquel
Urtasun. Vision Meets Robotics: The KITTI Dataset. Int. J.
Rob. Res., 32(11):1231–1237, 2013. 1
[6] Wolfgang Hess, Damon Kohler, Holger Rapp, and Daniel
Andor. Real-time Loop Closure in 2D LiDAR SLAM. In
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom., pages 1271–1278, 2016. 1
[7] Sheng Hong, Junjie He, Xinhu Zheng, Chunran Zheng, and
Shaojie Shen. LIV-GaussMap: LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Fu-
sion for Real-time 3D Radiance Field Map Rendering. IEEE
Robot. Autom. Lett., 2024. 2, 3, 8
[8] Huajian Huang, Longwei Li, Hui Cheng, and Sai-Kit Ye-
ung.
Photo-SLAM: Real-time Simultaneous Localization
and Photorealistic Mapping for Monocular Stereo and RGB-
D Cameras.
In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog.,
pages 21584–21593, 2024. 2, 3, 6
[9] Chenxing Jiang, Hanwen Zhang, Peize Liu, Zehuan Yu, Hui
Cheng, Boyu Zhou, and Shaojie Shen. H2-Mapping: Real-
time Dense Mapping Using Hierarchical Hybrid Representa-
tion. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., 2023. 3
[10] Chenxing Jiang, Yiming Luo, Boyu Zhou, and Shaojie Shen.
H3-Mapping: Quasi-Heterogeneous Feature Grids for Real-
time Dense Mapping Using Hierarchical Hybrid Representa-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10821, 2024. 3
[11] Mohammad Mahdi Johari, Camilla Carta, and Franc¸ois
Fleuret. ESLAM: Efficient Dense SLAM System based on
Hybrid Representation of Signed Distance Fields. In IEEE
Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pages 17408–17419,
2023. 3
[12] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula,
Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan, and
Jonathon Luiten. SplaTAM: Splat Track & Map 3D Gaus-
sians for Dense RGB-D SLAM. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pages 21357–21366, 2024. 2, 3, 6
[13] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis. 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time
Radiance Field Rendering. ACM Trans. Graph., 42(4):139–
1, 2023. 2, 5, 6, 7, 1
[14] Bernhard Kerbl, Andreas Meuleman, Georgios Kopanas,
Michael Wimmer, Alexandre Lanvin, and George Drettakis.
A Hierarchical 3D Gaussian Representation for Real-time
Rendering of Very Large Datasets. ACM Trans. Graph., 43
(4):1–15, 2024. 2
[15] Xiaolei Lang, Chao Chen, Kai Tang, Yukai Ma, Jiajun
Lv, Yong Liu, and Xingxing Zuo. Coco-LIC: Continuous-
time Tightly-coupled LiDAR-Inertial-Camera Odometry us-
ing Non-uniform B-spline. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., 2023.
3
[16] Xiaolei Lang, Laijian Li, Hang Zhang, Feng Xiong, Mu
Xu, Yong Liu, Xingxing Zuo, and Jiajun Lv.
Gaussian-
LIC: Photo-realistic LiDAR-Inertial-Camera SLAM with 3D
Gaussian Splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06926, 2024.
2, 3, 8
[17] Bo Li, Yingqiang Wang, Yu Zhang, Wenjie Zhao, Jianyuan
Ruan, and Ping Li.
GP-SLAM: Laser-based SLAM Ap-
proach based on Regionalized Gaussian Process Map Recon-
struction. Auton. Rob., 44(6):947–967, 2020. 2
[18] Jiarong Lin and Fu Zhang. R3LIVE: A Robust, Real-Time,
RGB-colored, LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Tightly-coupled State
Estimation and Mapping Package. In IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., pages 10672–10678, 2022. 1, 2, 3, 6, 7, 8, 4
[19] Jiarong Lin, Chunran Zheng, Wei Xu, and Fu Zhang.
R2LIVE: A Robust,
Real-Time,
LiDAR-Inertial-Visual
Tightly-coupled State Estimator and Mapping. IEEE Robot.
Autom. Lett., 6(4):7469–7476, 2021. 1, 2
[20] Yuanzhi Liu, Yujia Fu, Minghui Qin, Yufeng Xu, Baoxin
Xu, Fengdong Chen, Bart Goossens, Hongwei Yu, Chun Liu,
Long Chen, et al. BotanicGarden: A High-quality and Large-
scale Robot Navigation Dataset in Challenging Natural En-
vironments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2306.14137, 2023. 6, 7, 8,
2, 4
[21] Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul HJ Kelly, and Andrew J
Davison. Gaussian Splatting SLAM. In IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recog., pages 18039–18048, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 7
[22] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. NeRF:
Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View
Synthesis. In Eur. Conf. Comput. Vis., 2020. 2, 3
[23] Thomas M¨uller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexan-
der Keller. Instant Neural Graphics Primitives with a Mul-
tiresolution Hash Encoding. ACM Trans. Graph., 41(4):1–
15, 2022. 3
[24] Thien-Minh Nguyen, Shenghai Yuan, Muqing Cao, Yang
Lyu, Thien H Nguyen, and Lihua Xie.
NTU VRAL: A
Visual-Inertial-Ranging-LiDAR Dataset, from an Aerial Ve-
hicle Viewpoint. Int. J. Rob. Res., 41(3):270–280, 2022. 6,
7
[25] Morgan Quigley, Ken Conley, Brian Gerkey, Josh Faust,
Tully Foote, Jeremy Leibs, Rob Wheeler, Andrew Y Ng,
et al. ROS: An Open-source Robot Operating System. In
IEEE Int. Conf. Robot. Autom. Worksh., page 5. Kobe, Japan,
2009. 7
[26] Carl Edward Rasmussen. Gaussian Processes in Machine
Learning. In Summer School on Machine Learning, pages
63–71. Springer, 2003. 4
[27] Antoni Rosinol, John J Leonard, and Luca Carlone. NeRF-
SLAM: Real-time Dense Monocular SLAM with nNeural
Radiance Fields. In IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., pages
3437–3444, 2023. 2, 3, 6, 7
9

<!-- page 10 -->
[28] Jianyuan Ruan, Bo Li, Yinqiang Wang, and Zhou Fang.
GP-SLAM+: Real-time 3D LiDAR SLAM based on Im-
proved Regionalized Gaussian Process Map Reconstruction.
In IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., pages 5171–5178, 2020.
2, 4
[29] Erik Sandstr¨om, Yue Li, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R
Oswald.
Point-SLAM: Dense Neural Point Cloud-based
SLAM.
In Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pages 18433–18444,
2023. 3
[30] Johannes
Lutz
Sch¨onberger
and
Jan-Michael
Frahm.
Structure-from-Motion Revisited. In IEEE Conf. Comput.
Vis. Pattern Recog., 2016. 5, 7
[31] Matthias Seeger. Gaussian Processes for Machine Learning.
Int. J. Neural. Syst., 14(02):69–106, 2004. 2
[32] Tixiao Shan, Brendan Englot, Drew Meyers, Wei Wang,
Carlo Ratti, and Daniela Rus. LIO-SAM: Tightly-coupled
LiDAR Inertial Odometry via Smoothing and Mapping. In
IEEE Int. Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., pages 5135–5142, 2020. 2
[33] Tixiao Shan, Brendan Englot, Carlo Ratti, and Daniela Rus.
LVI-SAM: Tightly-coupled LiDAR-Visual-Inertial Odome-
try via Smoothing and Mapping. In IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
Autom., pages 5692–5698, 2021. 2, 4
[34] J¨urgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram
Burgard, and Daniel Cremers. A Benchmark for the Eval-
uation of RGB-D SLAM Systems. In IEEE Int. Conf. Intell.
Rob. Syst., pages 573–580, 2012. 2
[35] Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J Davi-
son. iMAP: Implicit Mapping and Positioning in Real-time.
In Int. Conf. Comput. Vis., pages 6229–6238, 2021. 2, 6
[36] Lisong C Sun, Neel P Bhatt, Jonathan C Liu, Zhiwen Fan,
Zhangyang Wang, Todd E Humphreys, and Ufuk Topcu.
MM3DGS SLAM: Multi-modal 3D Gaussian Splatting for
SLAM Using Vision, Depth, and Inertial Measurements.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.00923, 2024. 3
[37] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. DROID-SLAM: Deep Visual
SLAM for Monocular, Stereo, and RGB-D Cameras. Adv.
Neural Inform. Process. Syst., 34:16558–16569, 2021. 3
[38] Hengyi Wang, Jingwen Wang, and Lourdes Agapito. Co-
SLAM: Joint Coordinate and Sparse Parametric Encodings
for Neural Real-time SLAM. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pages 13293–13302, 2023. 3
[39] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P
Simoncelli. Image Quality Sssessment: from Error Visibility
to Structural Similarity. IEEE Trans. Image Process., 13(4):
600–612, 2004. 6
[40] Chenyang Wu, Yifan Duan, Xinran Zhang, Yu Sheng,
Jianmin Ji, and Yanyong Zhang.
MM-Gaussian:
3D
Gaussian-based Multi-modal Fusion for Localization and
Reconstruction in Unbounded Scenes.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.04026, 2024. 3
[41] Ke Wu, Kaizhao Zhang, Zhiwei Zhang, Shanshuai Yuan,
Muer Tie, Julong Wei, Zijun Xu, Jieru Zhao, Zhongxue
Gan, and Wenchao Ding.
HGS-Mapping: Online Dense
Mapping Using Hybrid Gaussian Representation in Urban
Scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20159, 2024. 3
[42] Wei Xu and Fu Zhang. Fast-LIO: A Fast, Robust LiDAR-
Inertial Odometry Package by Tightly-coupled Iterated
Kalman Filter. IEEE Robot. Autom. Lett., 6(2):3317–3324,
2021. 1, 2
[43] Wei Xu, Yixi Cai, Dongjiao He, Jiarong Lin, and Fu Zhang.
Fast-LIO2: Fast Direct LiDAR-Inertial Odometry.
IEEE
Trans. Robot., 38(4):2053–2073, 2022. 1, 2, 4
[44] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dan Xu, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong
Wang, and Xuelong Li. GS-SLAM: Dense Visual SLAM
with 3D Gaussian Splatting.
In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pages 19595–19604, 2024. 2, 3, 6
[45] Dongyu Yan, Xiaoyang Lyu, Jieqi Shi, and Yi Lin. Efficient
Implicit Neural Reconstruction using LiDAR. In IEEE Int.
Conf. Robot. Autom., pages 8407–8414. IEEE, 2023. 3
[46] Yunzhi Yan, Haotong Lin, Chenxu Zhou, Weijie Wang,
Haiyang Sun, Kun Zhan, Xianpeng Lang, Xiaowei Zhou,
and Sida Peng. Street Gaussians for Modeling Dynamic Ur-
ban Scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01339, 2024. 2, 3
[47] Xingrui Yang, Hai Li, Hongjia Zhai, Yuhang Ming, Yuqian
Liu, and Guofeng Zhang. Vox-Fusion: Dense Tracking and
Mapping with Voxel-based Neural Implicit Representation.
In IEEE Int. Symp. on Mix. and Augm. Real., pages 499–507,
2022. 3
[48] Zikang Yuan, Jie Deng, Ruiye Ming, Fengtian Lang, and
Xin Yang. SR-LIVO: LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Odometry and
Mapping With Sweep Reconstruction. IEEE Robot. Autom.
Lett., 2024. 1, 2, 3
[49] Vladimir Yugay, Yue Li, Theo Gevers, and Martin R Oswald.
Gaussian-SLAM: Photo-Realistic Dense SLAM with Gaus-
sian Splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10070, 2023. 2, 3,
6
[50] Ji Zhang and Sanjiv Singh. Low-drift and Real-time LiDAR
Odometry and Mapping. Autonomous Robots, 41(2):401–
416, 2017. 2
[51] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman,
and Oliver Wang. The Unreasonable Effectiveness of Deep
Features as a Perceptual Metric. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pages 586–595, 2018. 6
[52] Chunran Zheng, Qingyan Zhu, Wei Xu, Xiyuan Liu, Qizhi
Guo, and Fu Zhang. Fast-LIVO: Fast and Tightly-coupled
Sparse-direct LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Odometry. In IEEE Int.
Conf. Intell. Rob. Syst., pages 4003–4009, 2022. 1, 2, 6, 7
[53] Chunran Zheng, Wei Xu, Zuhao Zou, Tong Hua, Chongjian
Yuan, Dongjiao He, Bingyang Zhou, Zheng Liu, Jiarong Lin,
Fangcheng Zhu, et al.
Fast-LIVO2: Fast, Direct LiDAR-
Inertial-Visual Odometry. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.14035,
2024. 2, 3
[54] Xiaoyu Zhou, Zhiwei Lin, Xiaojun Shan, Yongtao Wang,
Deqing Sun, and Ming-Hsuan Yang.
DrivingGaussian:
Composite Gaussian Splatting for Surrounding Dynamic
Autonomous Driving Scenes. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis.
Pattern Recog., pages 21634–21643, 2024. 2, 3
[55] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hu-
jun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and Marc Polle-
feys. NICE-SLAM: Neural Implicit Scalable Encoding for
SLAM. In IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recog., pages
12786–12796, 2022. 3
10

<!-- page 11 -->
GS-LIVM: Real-Time Photo-Realistic LiDAR-Inertial-Visual Mapping with
Gaussian Splatting
Supplementary Material
6. Pseudocode for Preprocessing Algorithm
ALG.STORE & CUDA Batched Algorithm
ALG.SOLVE in Voxel-GPR
Preprocessing algorithm for latest scanned point cloud Pf
is shown in Algorithm 2. Each point in Pf is stored into
a voxel structure, and the visited voxel information in this
frame is recoeded simultaneously. Utilizing the cuBLAS
scientific computing library within the GPU, the pseu-
docode for batch-solving (3) for all voxels is shown as Al-
gorithm 3.
Algorithm 2: Preprocessing for single-frame col-
lected point clouds
Input: Pf , C (Global Stored Point Cloud in Voxels)
Output: Supdated(StoreVisited Voxels in This Frame)
1 Supdated ←[ ]
2 for p in Pf do
3
Hp = ALG.HASH(px, py, pz)
4
push p to C[Hp] →points
5
push Hp to Supdated
6 end
Algorithm 3: Batch solving µ∗and Σ∗in Voxel-
GPR based on cuBLAS
Input: f, K, K∗, K∗∗
Output: µ∗, Σ∗
1 # Add Noise
2
ky ←K+σ2I
3 # Inplace LU Decomposition
4
cublasSgetrfBatched(ky)
5 # Calculate Inverse Matrix of ky
6
kyInv ←cublasSgetriBatched(ky)
7 # Matrix Multiplication
8
kk∗←cublasSgemmBatched(K∗, kyInv)
9
f∗←µ∗←cublasSgemmBatched(kk∗, f)
10
Σ∗←K∗∗- cublasSgemmBatched(kk∗, K∗)
7. Supplementary Experiments
7.1. Comparison with Fully Optimized Offline
3DGS
In the rendering comparison presented in Figure 5, to en-
sure a fair comparison, we limit the training of the origi-
nal 3DGS implementation to 3000 iterations. Interestingly,
we discover that with sufficient optimization time, 3DGS
indeed achieves better metrics than our method (Table 4).
This is because 3DGS involves offline optimization over an
extended period to overfit the training data. Nonetheless,
limitations are encountered with NVS, as demonstrated in
Figure 8. Overfitting to the training dataset causes 3D Gaus-
sians to extend beyond the observation point, which is the
primary issue with offline methods. It can be observed that
our method can overcome the drawbacks of overfitting.
Table 4. Comparison with the fully optimized offline 3DGS [13].
Sequence
3DGS
Ours
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
hku seq 00
27.827
0.861
0.204
22.430
0.719
0.247
1005 00
26.196
0.812
0.233
21.123
0.679
0.258
(a) 3DGS [13]
(b) Ours
(c) 3DGS [13]
(d) Ours
Figure 8. In all subfigures, the top images represent a supervised
perspective with image information, while the bottom images de-
pict an unsupervised perspective with synthesized new viewpoints.
Results in (a)(c) are obtained using the offline 3DGS method,
while results in (b)(d) are obtained using our method.
1

<!-- page 12 -->
Table 5. Quantitative rendering performance comparison on more datasets. The results ranked from best to worst are highlighted as first ,
second , and third .
Nerf-SLAM [27]
MonoGS [21]
3DGS [13]
Ours
Sequence
LiDAR
Type
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
hkust campus 02
Livox Avia
10.728
0.389
0.716
12.408
0.426
0.582
17.629
0.692
0.412
15.745
0.634
0.382
hku1
Livox Avia
9.232
0.384
0.716
8.928
0.286
0.750
19.548
0.708
0.328
14.990
0.600
0.424
1018 00
Velodyne VLP-16
12.186
0.387
0.699
12.721
0.634
0.417
23.452
0.720
0.253
16.971
0.688
0.338
private-360
Livox MID-360
13.681
0.407
0.598
8.912
0.263
0.778
22.428
0.693
0.302
17.777
0.618
0.439
private-pandar
Pandar XT-32
9.492
0.328
0.610
7.414
0.289
0.623
18.647
0.658
0.369
16.234
0.600
0.330
7.2. More Rendering and Mapping Results
We collect a Livox MID-360 (private-360) and a HESAI
Pandar XT-32 (private-pandar) sequence with image reso-
lution 640×512 to verify the performance of our algorithm
in different LiDAR types additionally. The expanded com-
parision of rendering performance are shown in Table 5.
It is worth noting that our method can reconstruct the
entire scene with limited GPU resources (8GB), which is a
feature unattainable by other methods [7, 16]. In Figure 9,
we present snapshots of rendered images in correspond-
ing whole sequences. It can be observed that our method
maintains excellent rendering quality even in large outdoor
scenes under the real-time mapping requirement.
Since our 3D Gaussians information is initialized from
point clouds, the rendering performance for sparse multi-
line spinning LiDAR is inferior to that of the Livox LiDAR
due to the difference in point cloud density. This difference
can be observed in the Botanic Garden sequence in Figure 9.
The reconstructed 3D Gaussian models of sequences
hku main building and 1005 01 are also presented in Fig-
ure 10. Sequence hku main building has a duration of 20
minutes and a trajectory length of approximately 900 me-
ters, yet we are still able to achieve real-time map expan-
sion. Outdoor park (sequence 1005 01) typically contains
rich structural and textural features, making photo-realistic
mapping highly challenging. Using Velodyne VLP-16 Li-
DAR in the outdoor park, our proposed algorithm is able to
achieve a good dense reconstruction model.
7.3. More Ablation Experiments
Expanded ablation experiments on additional sequences are
presented in Table 6. In challenging environments, such as
sensor degradation (Visual Challenge) or very sparse point
clouds (eee 02), the experiments continue to show that our
module design is robust, enhancing photorealistic mapping
effects in these scenarios.
7.4. Tracking Performance
Our photo-realistic mapping method utilizes a general
SLAM framework to obtain precise camera poses. In the-
ory, this approach can be integrated into any general LIVO
framework. In our experiments, we adopt the framework
from [48]. Compared to the original [48], we introduc the
following improvements: 1) We replace the time sweep-
Table 6. Quantitative ablation comparison of hyperparameters in
various sequences, such as duration (DT), mapping time (MT),
interval of 3D Gaussians in voxel side ns, convergence variance
of Voxel-GPR η, structure similarity loss (SS), and delta depth
similarity loss (DDS).
Sequence
DT (s)
MT (s)
ns
η
SS
DDS
PSNR
SSIM
166
3
0.1
✗
✗
18.479
0.608
162
3
0.3
✗
✗
17.326
0.617
162
3
0.3
✓
✗
17.599
0.626
162
3
0.3
✓
✓
18.127
0.613
Visual
Challenge
162
162
4
0.3
✓
✓
18.422
0.659
321
3
0.2
✗
✗
12.766
0.436
321
3
0.3
✗
✗
12.136
0.430
321
3
0.3
✓
✗
12.395
0.434
321
3
0.3
✓
✓
12.512
0.441
eee 02
321
321
4
0.3
✓
✓
14.328
0.473
based refinement method with the sensor’s original times-
tamps at a finer granularity, resolving the crash issue when
using multi-line spinning LiDAR. 2) We apply CUDA en-
capsulation for certain large matrix multiplications to accel-
erate optimization. To ensure the fairness of comparisons,
we conduct tracking experiments on the improved version
of [48].
We compare improved method with filter-based method
R3LIVE [18], FAST-LIO2 [43], and graph optimization
based method LVI-SAM [33].
In tracking performance
evaluation, we focus on key performance metrics Rel-
ative Pose Error (RPE) and Absolute Trajectory Error
(ATE) [34], considering full transformations that encom-
pass both rotation and translation.
To assess the adaptability of our dataset for tracking,
we meticulously select 7 representative sequences from the
Botanic dataset [20] and conduct comprehensive evalua-
tions on cutting-edge algorithms, including those presented
in [18, 33, 43], by comparing them against ground truth
data. The data used for our tracking algorithm comes from
a Velodyne VLP-16 multi-line spinning LiDAR. Table 7
presents the evaluation metrics on 7 sequences from the
Botanic Garden [20] dataset. Our method, lacking a loop
closure detection module, exhibits lower accuracy on some
sequences compared to LVI-SAM [33]. Overall, compar-
isons with above state-of-the-art methods reveal that our ap-
proach demonstrates clear advantages on certain sequences.
Figure 11 illustrates the trajectory comparison for the se-
quence 1006 01 within the Botanic Garden [20] dataset,
featuring a trajectory length of approximately 730 meters.
2

<!-- page 13 -->
Figure 9. Illustration of the rendering performance of the entire sequence from a dataset. It is noteworthy that these illustrations are all
rendered based on the real-time mapping results. These scenes are hkust campus seq 00 (Livox AVIA), Visual Challenge (Livox AVIA),
eee 03 (Ouster 16), 1005 00 (Livox AVIA), hku park 00 (Livox AVIA), hku main building (Livox AVIA), 1006 01 (Livox AVIA), 1006 01
(Velodyne VLP-16), 1005 01 (Velodyne VLP-16), and eee 03 (Ouster 16), respectively.
3

<!-- page 14 -->
Figure 10. More illustrations of the 3D Gaussians model of the entire sequence. These two scenes are hku main building ((Livox AVIA))
and 1005 01 (Velodyne VLP-16), respectively.
Table 7. Quantitative tracking performance comparison of LiDAR-IMU SLAM method [43] and LiDAR-Visual-IMU fusion SLAM
method [18, 33] on BotanicGarden dataset [20].
1005 00
1005 01
1005 07
1006 01
1008 03
1018 00
1018 13
RPE↓
ATE↓
RPE↓
ATE↓
RPE↓
ATE↓
RPE↓
ATE↓
RPE↓
ATE↓
RPE↓
ATE↓
RPE↓
ATE↓
R3LIVE [18]
1.165
3.153
1.151
1.451
2.112
3.893
0.934
3.505
2.050
3.383
0.165
0.378
0.133
0.366
FAST-LIO2 [43]
1.048
2.665
0.652
0.483
0.947
0.751
1.047
1.521
0.852
0.798
0.241
0.187
0.245
0.308
LVI-SAM [33]
0.347
0.312
0.147
0.129
0.127
0.257
0.462
0.410
0.272
0.252
0.139
0.044
0.152
0.051
OURS
0.174
0.291
0.058
0.073
0.061
0.496
0.202
0.702
0.068
0.414
0.055
0.075
0.050
0.077
Figure 11. The trajectory comparison for the Botanic Garden se-
quence 1006 01 is illustrated, featuring a detailed illustration of a
three-way intersection within the scene in the upper left, with the
offset along the Z plane for this junction depicted below. It is ev-
ident from this comparison that our trajectory aligns most closely
with the actual trajectory, demonstrating a high level of tracking
precision.
In the top right corner of Figure 11, an enlarged view of
a three-way junction on the X-Y plane is presented, while
the bottom right corner displays an elevation map of the
same junction on the Z plane. From the visual represen-
tation, it is evident that our trajectory aligns most closely
with the ground truth, showcasing the highest qualitative
tracking precision. More comparison results are available
on Figure 12.
Table 8. Duration (DT), mapping time (MT), count of 3D Gaus-
sians, maximum memory cost (Mem), and rendering metrics on
ultra long sequence.
Sequence
DT (s)
MT (s)
Count
Mem (Mb)
PSNR
SSIM
hku main building
1170
1170
2,674,234
4489
15.234
0.538
hkust campus 00
1073
1090
3,302,675
5812
15.124
0.496
7.5. Time Consumption and Memory Usage on
Ultra-Long Time Sequence
Addressing SLAM and photo-realistic mapping in ultra-
long time sequence is a challenging issue. As the scale of
the map increases, insufficient available storage space leads
to a slowdown or interruption in the mapping process. To
deal with these problems, we conduct tests on two ultra-
long sequences in test dataset. With the limited GPU re-
sources, we set nr=2 and obtain the mapping time, render-
4

<!-- page 15 -->
Figure 12. More trajectory comparisons. The first row of images shows the trajectory of the entire scene, while the second row of images
displays the enlarged results within the corresponding blue boxes. The four scenes are 1005 00, 1005 07, 1008 03, 1008 13, respectively.
Figure 13. Time consumption and GPU memory consumption on
ultra long scequence hku main building (Duration: 1170 s).
Table 9. Hyper parameters used in all datasets.
Name
Value
Description
size
0.2
Side length of each voxel.
τ
10
Point count threshold for voxel processing.
ns
3
Interval between each side within the voxel.
nr
3
Number of neighboring Gaussians per side.
η
0.3
Convergence threshold for Voxel-GPR.
λSSIM
0.2
Weight for the photometric SSIM loss.
λp
0.1
Weight for the structural similarity loss.
λd
0.1
Weight for delta depth similarity loss.
T
50
Size of the sliding window for recent images.
kcurr
1
Number of frames selected from the current window.
khis
1
Number of frames selected from historical data.
lrposition
0.0005
Learning rate for position parameters.
lrcolor
0.0025
Learning rate for color parameters.
lropacity
0.025
Learning rate for opacity parameters.
lrscale
0.0025
Learning rate for scale parameters.
lrrotation
0.0025
Learning rate for rotation parameters.
ing metrics, as shown in Table 8. The time and GPU mem-
ory consumption of each algorithm module over time are
depicted in Figure 13. In the later stages of the long time
series, most of the time is spent on rendering the ultra-large
3DGS map, map feedback, and optimization. It can be seen
that our method is still able to achieve real-time map expan-
sion in ultra-long sequences, with resource consumption in
ultra-large scenes remaining within acceptable levels.
7.6. Hyper Parameters in Our Experiments
The hyper parameters used in all our sequences are listed in
Table 9. For more configuration details, please refer to the
config file in our GitHub repository.
8. Limitations
In this paper, real-time performance is our primary focus,
with all modules specifically designed to minimize the time
complexity of the algorithm, thus ultimately enabling real-
time photo-realistic mapping in large-scale open environ-
ments.
However, the study does have some limitations:
The initialization of the 3DGS model is solely reliant on
the point cloud data, which results in initialization failure in
areas lacking point cloud coverage, leading to missing re-
gions. Future research will explore integrating image data
to aid in the initialization process. Moreover, due to the
real-time constraints, the reconstruction quality may not
match that of images obtained through actual data acqui-
sition. Improving the reconstruction quality will be part of
our future research endeavors.
5
