<!-- page 1 -->
1
3D Gaussian Splatting in Robotics: A Survey
Siting Zhu, Guangming Wang, Xin Kong, Dezhi Kong, Hesheng Wang Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Dense 3D representations of the environment have been a long-term goal in the robotics field. While previous Neural
Radiance Fields (NeRF) representation have been prevalent for its implicit, coordinate-based model, the recent emergence of 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) has demonstrated remarkable potential in its explicit radiance field representation. By leveraging 3D
Gaussian primitives for explicit scene representation and enabling differentiable rendering, 3DGS has shown significant advantages
over other radiance fields in real-time rendering and photo-realistic performance, which is beneficial for robotic applications. In this
survey, we provide a comprehensive understanding of 3DGS in the field of robotics. We divide our discussion of the related works into
two main categories: the application of 3DGS and the advancements in 3DGS techniques. In the application section, we explore how
3DGS has been utilized in various robotics tasks from scene understanding and interaction perspectives. The advance of 3DGS
section focuses on the improvements of 3DGS own properties in its adaptability and efficiency, aiming to enhance its performance in
robotics. We then summarize the most commonly used datasets and evaluation metrics in robotics. Finally, we identify the challenges
and limitations of current 3DGS methods and discuss the future development of 3DGS in robotics. The paper lists of our survey are
available at 3D Gaussian Splatting in Robotics.
Index Terms—3D Gaussian Splatting, Robotics, Scene Understanding and Interaction, Challenges and Future Directions
✦
1
INTRODUCTION
T
He advent of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [1] has
promoted the development of robotics, particularly en-
hancing robots’ capabilities in perception, scene reconstruc-
tion and interaction with their environments. However, this
implicit representation suffers from its inefficient per-pixel
raycasting rendering for optimization. The emergence of 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [2] addresses this inefficiency
by its explicit representation and achieves high-quality and
real-time rendering through splatting. Specifically, 3DGS
models the environment using a set of Gaussian primitives
with learnable parameters, providing explicit representation
of scenes. In rendering process, 3DGS employs splatting [3]
to project 3D Gaussians into 2D image space given camera
poses and applies tile-based rasterizer for acceleration, en-
abling real-time performance. Therefore, 3DGS has greater
potential to promote the performance and expand the capa-
bilities of robotic systems.
With the debut of 3DGS in 2023, several survey pa-
pers [4], [5], [6], [7], [8], [9] have been published to show
the developments in this area. Chen et al. [4] presented
the first survey of 3DGS. This survey describes the recent
developments and critical contributions of 3DGS methods.
Fei et al. [5] introduced a unified framework for categorizing
existing works in 3DGS. Wu et al. [7] presented a survey
including both traditional splatting methods and recent
neural-based 3DGS methods, showing the development in
splatting techniques of 3DGS. Bao et al. [9] provided a
This work was supported in part by the Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 62225309, 62073222, U21A20480 and 62361166632.
(Corresponding author: Hesheng Wang.)
Siting Zhu is with the Department of Automation, Shanghai Jiao Tong
University, Shanghai. (email: zhusiting@sjtu.edu.cn) Guangming Wang is
with the University of Cambridge. Xin Kong is with Imperial College London.
Dezhi Kong is with Shanghai Jiao Tong University, Shanghai.
Hesheng Wang is with Department of Automation, Key Laboratory of
System Control and Information Processing of Ministry of Education, Key
Laboratory of Marine Intelligent Equipment and System of Ministry of
Education, Shanghai Jiao Tong University. (email: wanghesheng@sjtu.edu.cn)
more detailed classification based on technologies of 3DGS.
Additionally, Dalal et al. [6] focused on the tasks of 3D Re-
construction in 3DGS and Bagdasarian et al. [8] summarized
3DGS-based compression methods, which demonstrates the
weaknesses and advantages of 3DGS in specific domains.
However, existing 3DGS surveys either provide broad
categorizations of 3DGS works or focus on real-time view
synthesis of 3DGS, which lacks detailed summaries in the
field of robotics. Therefore, in this paper, we provide a com-
prehensive summary and detailed classification of 3DGS in
robotics. We introduce application of 3DGS in robotics and
provide a detailed classification of related works regarding
3DGS-based robotic applications. Moreover, we summarize
the potential solutions to enhance 3DGS representation for
robotic systems. Finally, we show performance evaluation
of 3DGS-based works and discuss the future development
of 3DGS in robotics. The overall framework of our survey is
demonstrated in Fig. 1.
Section 2 provides a brief background on core concepts
and mathematical principles of 3DGS. Section 3 catego-
rizes various application directions of 3DGS in robotics
and presents a detailed classification of related works in
specific directions. Section 4 discusses various advances that
improve the representation of 3DGS, aiming to enhance
its capability for robotics tasks. Additionally, in Section 5,
we summarize the datasets and evaluation metrics that are
used in applications of 3DGS in robotics. Moreover, this
section also compares the performance of existing methods
in different robotic directions. In Section 6, we discuss the
challenges and future directions of 3DGS in robotics. Finally,
Section 7 presents the conclusion of this survey.
2
BACKGROUND
2.1
3DGS Theory
3DGS [2] introduces an explicit radiance field representa-
tion for real-time and high-quality rendering of 3D scenes.
arXiv:2410.12262v2  [cs.RO]  19 Dec 2024

<!-- page 2 -->
2
3DGS in Robotics
Application of 3DGS
in Robotics
Advance of 3DGS 
in Robotics
Scene Understanding
(Section       )
Scene Interaction
(Section      )
Large-Scale
Motion-Blurred
Reconstruction
(Section 
)
Static Reconstruction
Dynamic Reconstruction
Segmentation & Editing
(Section 
)
Adaptability
(Section     )
Efficiency
(Section    
)
SLAM
(Section 
)
Scene Segmentation
Scene Editing
Visual SLAM
Semantic SLAM
Multi-sensor Fusion SLAM
Manipulation
(Section 
)
Navigation
(Section 
)
Localization
Path Planning
Few-Shot
Memory Efficiency
3.1.1
3.1.2
3.1.3
3.2.1
3.2.2
3.1
3.2
4.1
4.2
Fig. 1: A taxonomy of 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) in Robotics.
Fig. 2: An illustration of the forward process of 3DGS.
This technique models the environment using a set of 3D
Gaussian primitives, denoted as G = {g1, g2, . . . , gn}. Each
3D Gaussian gi is parameterized by a set of learnable
properties, including the 3D center position µi ∈R3, 3D
covariance matrix Σi ∈R3×3, opacity oi ∈[0, 1], and color
ci represented by spherical harmonics (SH) coefficients [10]
for view-dependent appearance. These properties allow for
the spatial compact representation of an individual Gaus-
sian as:
gi(x) = e−1
2 (x−µi)T Σ−1
i
(x−µi).
(1)
Here, covariance matrix Σ of 3D Gaussian is analogous to
describing the configuration of an ellipsoid, and is com-
puted as Σ = RSST RT . S is a scaling matrix and R
represents the rotation.
3DGS
takes
multi-view
images
as
input,
generat-
ing a sparse point cloud through Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) [11], which is then used to initialize 3D Gaussian
primitives. The 3D Gaussian representation is subsequently
optimized by adjusting the properties of these primitives
to minimize the difference between rendered and ground-
truth images. Rendering results in 3DGS are produced using
a splatting process alongside a differentiable, tile-based ras-
terizer designed for acceleration. Additionally, 3DGS incor-
porates adaptive density control to optimize the number of
3D Gaussians used in scene representation. Fig. 2 illustrates
the forward process of 3DGS. The following sections detail
the splatting process, which enables fast rendering, the loss
function employed in 3D Gaussian optimization, and the
adaptive density control technique. This adaptive control
allows for progressively densifying an initially sparse Gaus-
sian set, resulting in a more refined scene representation.
Splatting.
In this process, 3D Gaussians are projected to
2D image space for rendering. Given the viewing transfor-
mation W, the projected 2D covariance matrix in camera
coordinates is computed as Σ′ = JWΣW T JT , where J is
the Jacobian of the affine approximation of the projective
transformation. Therefore, the final pixel color C can be
computed by α-blending 3D Gaussian splats that overlap
at a given pixel, with the Gaussians sorted in depth order:
C =
X
i∈N
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj),
(2)
where the final opacity αi is formulated as:
αi = oi exp

−1
2(x′ −µ′
i)T Σ′−1
i
(x′ −µ′
i)

,
(3)
where x′ and µ′
i are coordinates in the projected space.

<!-- page 3 -->
3
PVG
(Chen et al.)
360-GS
(Bai et al.)
GaussianRoom
(Xiang et al.)
DHGS
(Shi et al.)
SWAG
(Dahmani et al.)
HGS-Mapping
(Wu et al.)
HO-Gaussian
(Li et al.)
TCLC-GS
(Zhao et al.)
PGSR
(Chen et al.)
GaussianPro
(Cheng et al.)
GauStudio
(Ye et al.)
Wild-GS
(Xu et al.)
DrivingGaussian
(Zhou et al.)
Street Gaussians
(Yan et al.)
HUGS
(Zhou et al.)
𝑆3 Gaussian
(Huang et al.)
MoSca
(Lei et al.)
4DGF
(Fischer et al.)
EgoGaussian
(Zhang et al.)
VDG
(Li et al.)
AutoSplat
(Khan et al.)
AmbientGaussian
(Shih et al.)
4D-Rotor
(Duan et al.)
ED3DGS
(Bae et al.)
P4DGS
(Yang et al.)
Dynamic 3DG
(Luiten et al.)
Deformable 3DG
(Yang et al.)
4DGaussians
(Wu et al.)
Efficient  3DG
(Katsumata et al.)
Gaussian-Flow
(Lin et al.)
SC-GS
(Huang et al.)
STG
(Li et al.)
3DGStream
(Sun et al.)
GaGS
(Lu et al.)
R3DG
(Zhang et al.)
SP-GS
(Wan et al.)
GauFRe
(Liang et al.)
SWAGS
(Shaw et al.)
DGM
(Stearns et al.)
2024
WildGaussians
(Kulhanek et al.)
IM3DG
(Kim et al.)
2023
GS-LK
(Xie et al.)
S4D
(He et al.)
Static Reconstruction
Dynamic Reconstruction
Fig. 3: Chronological: 3DGS for Scene Reconstruction. The red dots in the figure represent months, which also applys to
the other figures.
Loss Function.
For the optimization of 3D Gaussian prop-
erties, the loss is constructed as the difference between
splatting image and ground truth image. Specifically, the
loss function is a combination of L1 loss and a D-SSIM term:
L = (1 −λ)L1 + λLD-SSIM,
(4)
where λ is a weighting coefficient and is set to 0.2 in 3DGS.
Adaptive Density Control. In the process of Gaussian opti-
mization, 3DGS employs periodic adaptive densification for
detailed reconstruction. This strategy focuses on areas with
missing geometric features or regions where Gaussians are
over-expanded, both exhibiting large view-space positional
gradients. For under-reconstructed areas, small Gaussians
are cloned and moved towards the positional gradient di-
rection. In over-reconstructed regions, large Gaussians with
high variance are split into two smaller ones. Additionally,
3DGS removes Gaussians that are virtually transparent,
with opacity less than a specific threshold.
In conclusion, 3DGS introduces a novel explicit radiance
field representation using 3D Gaussian primitives, which
offers a compact, efficient, and flexible approach to model
3D scenes. The use of 3D Gaussian representation, combined
with the splatting process, differentiable optimization, and
adaptive density control, makes 3DGS a powerful tool for
real-time and high-quality rendering of complex 3D envi-
ronments.
3
APPLICATION OF 3DGS IN ROBOTICS
The advantages of 3DGS, including its explicit radiance
field representation and fast rendering capability, make it
an attractive representation option for robotics applications.
These properties are crucial for achieving comprehensive
scene understanding in robotics and executing particular
tasks through interaction with the environment.
3.1
Scene Understanding
3.1.1
Reconstruction
Scene reconstruction in robotics refers to the process of con-
structing a 3D representation of the environment using sen-
sor data. 3DGS emerges as a promising scene representation
to precisely model geometry and appearance information of
the environment, enabling photo-realistic scene reconstruc-
tion. 3DGS-based reconstruction can be categorized into
static reconstruction and dynamic reconstruction, depending on
whether dynamic objects in the environment are modeled.
We present a timeline of related works in Fig. 3.
Static Reconstruction.
Static scene reconstruction focuses
on environments with time-invariant geometry properties.
Considering that indoor and outdoor environments present
distinct challenges in reconstruction tasks due to differences
in scale, structural complexity, and lighting conditions, we
split our discussion into indoor and outdoor scene recon-
struction. Moreover, the effectiveness of static reconstruction
methods heavily relies on the input sensor data, appearance
and geometry modeling of the scenes, and the chosen scene
representation. These factors play a crucial role in determin-
ing the accuracy, level of detail, and efficiency of the recon-
struction process. Therefore, we categorize existing static
reconstruction methods based on four criteria: (i) the type
of input sensors, (ii) the approach to appearance modeling,
(iii) the use of geometric normal constraint, (iv) scene repre-
sentation methods, as presented in Table 1. Particularly, ap-
pearance modeling includes illumination and exposure, as
changing illumination conditions of the scenes and camera
exposure problem lead to inaccurate appearance modeling
of the environment. Scene representation in reconstruction
can be classified into using a single 3D Gaussian repre-
sentation (Single Gaussian), combining multiple Gaussian
representations for joint scene modeling (Hybrid Gaussian),
and integrating 3D Gaussian with neural network (Neural
Field Gaussian).
Indoor scenes exhibit defined spatial layouts and rich
textures. 360-GS [12] introduces a layout-guided regulariza-
tion on 3D Gaussians to reduce floaters caused by under-
constrained regions. For modeling input panoramas, it
projects 3D Gaussians onto the tangent plane of the unit
sphere and then maps them to the spherical projections.
GaussianRoom [13] incorporates a learnable neural SDF
field to guide the densification and pruning of Gaussian,
achieving accurate surface reconstruction. Kim et al. [14]
employ a hybrid representation for indoor scene reconstruc-
tion, using meshes to represent the room layout and 3D
Gaussians for the reconstruction of other objects.
Outdoor scenes present additional challenges, such as
varying illumination and scale variations. SWAG [16] mod-
els the appearance of scenes using a learnable Multi-Layer
Perceptron (MLP) network to address varying lighting
conditions in outdoor environments. Wild-GS [22] utilizes
hierarchical appearance modeling by extracting high-level
2D appearance information and constructing the positional-
aware local appearance embedding to handle the complex
appearance variances across different views. WildGaus-
sians [23] enhances 3DGS with a per-Gaussian trainable

<!-- page 4 -->
4
TABLE 1: Categorization: 3DGS for Static Reconstruction.
Methods
Input
Appearance Modeling
Geometry
Scene Representation
Monocular
Multi-camera
LiDAR
Illumination
Exposure
Normal
Single Gaussian
Hybrid Gaussian
Neural Field Gaussian
Indoor Reconstruction
360-GS [12]
✓
✓
GaussianRoom [13]
✓
✓
✓
IM3DG [14]
✓
✓
Outdoor Reconstruction
GaussianPro [15]
✓
✓
✓
SWAG [16]
✓
✓
✓
GauStudio [17]
✓
✓
✓
✓
HGS-Mapping [18]
✓
✓
✓
HO-Gaussian [19]
✓
✓
✓
TCLC-GS [20]
✓
✓
✓
PGSR [21]
✓
✓
✓
✓
Wild-GS [22]
✓
✓
✓
✓
WildGaussians [23]
✓
✓
✓
DHGS [24]
✓
✓
✓
embedding and uses a small MLP to integrate image and
appearance embedding, which addresses varying illumina-
tion conditions in the wild. PGSR [21] proposes a camera
exposure compensation model to address the large illumi-
nation variations in outdoor scenes.
Moreover, different parts of a scene often have distinct
characteristics that require tailored modeling approaches.
For example, sky regions, which are distant and lack geo-
metric detail, are challenging to represent effectively with
vanilla 3DGS in world coordinates. Similarly, modeling flat
surfaces like roads with 3D Gaussians can lead to redun-
dant representations. To address these challenges, HGS-
Mapping [18] uses a hybrid Gaussian representation: spher-
ical Gaussians for sky modeling, 2D Gaussian planes for
roads, and 3D Gaussians for roadside landscapes. Similarly,
GauStudio [17] also uses spherical Gaussian maps to model
the sky independently from the foreground. For road sur-
faces, DHGS [24] employs 2DGS [25] with SDF-based sur-
face constraints to enhance optimization. Additionally, HO-
Gaussian [19] integrates a grid-based volume into the 3DGS
pipeline to support geometric learning for the sky, distant,
and low-texture areas. TCLC-GS [20] combines colorized 3D
mesh and hierarchical octree features to enhance the 3D
Gaussian representation of urban scenes, while Gaussian-
Pro [15] applies planar loss to regularize Gaussian geometry
in outdoor environments.
Since real-world scenarios are inherently complex and
variable, accurately modeling appearance and geometry is
essential for static reconstruction. For representing static
scenes, hybrid Gaussians provide more precise modeling of
the entire scene compared to single Gaussians, as they can
adapt different modeling techniques to match the geomet-
ric structures of specific regions, whereas single Gaussians
apply a uniform approach throughout. Additionally, neural
field Gaussians excel in illumination modeling over both
single and hybrid Gaussians by incorporating an MLP net-
work, which enhances their capability to capture detailed
lighting variations.
Dynamic Reconstruction.
In real-world robotic applica-
tions, the presence of dynamic objects is inevitable. Vanilla
3DGS representation, primarily designed for static model-
ing, struggles with modeling the motions of dynamic objects
as they inevitably interfere with the optimization of Gaus-
sian parameters. Therefore, learning 3DGS-based models in
dynamic scenes is crucial. For dynamic reconstruction, the
key issues are how to differentiate between dynamic and
static components, and how to model the dynamic objects.
(a)
Time-varying-based
dy-
namic reconstruction
(b)
Deformation-based
dy-
namic reconstruction
(c) 4D Gaussian-based dynamic reconstruction
Fig. 4: An illustration of 3DGS for dynamic reconstruction.
Fig. 4a, Fig. 4b, and Fig. 4c are originally shown in [45], [37],
and [39], respectively.
Therefore, we categorize existing 3DGS-based dynamic
reconstruction methods based on three criteria: (i) the type
of input sensors, (ii) methods to separate static and dynamic
objects in the scenes, (iii) the dynamic modeling methods,
as presented in Table 2. Specifically, the separation of static
and dynamic components in the scenes can be achieved by
applying motion or semantic masks to detect the locations of
dynamic objects in images (referred to as 2D prior), using 3D
bounding boxes to identify dynamic objects (3D prior), or by
simultaneously modeling both static and dynamic elements
(no prior). Dynamic modeling methods can be classified into
time-varying, deformation-based, and 4D Gaussian modeling,
as shown in Fig. 4.
In terms of time-varying modeling methods, each 3D
Gaussian position is expressed as a function of time
to model the temporal change of the position. Dynamic
3DG [36] regularizes Gaussians’ motion and rotation with
local-rigidity constraints. PVG [26] and VDG [33] introduce
periodic vibration-based temporal dynamics by modify-
ing the mean and opacity of vanilla 3DGS to be time-
dependent functions centered around the life peak. Driving-

<!-- page 5 -->
5
TABLE 2: Categorization: 3DGS for Dynamic Reconstruction.
Methods
Input
Dynamic-Static Separation
Dynamic Modeling
Monocular
Multi-camera
LiDAR
3D Prior
2D Prior
No Prior
Time-varying
Deformation
4D Gaussian
PVG [26]
✓
✓
✓
✓
DrivingGaussian [27]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Street Gaussians [28]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
HUGS [29]
✓
✓
✓
✓
MoSca [30]
✓
✓
✓
S3Gaussian [31]
✓
✓
✓
✓
4DGF [32]
✓
✓
✓
✓
VDG [33]
✓
✓
✓
EgoGaussian [34]
✓
✓
✓
AutoSplat [35]
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
Dynamic 3DG [36]
✓
✓
✓
Deformable 3DG [37]
✓
✓
✓
4DGaussians [38]
✓
✓
✓
P4DGS [39]
✓
✓
✓
Efficient 3DG [40]
✓
✓
✓
SC-GS [41]
✓
✓
✓
Gaussian-Flow [42]
✓
✓
✓
GauFRe [43]
✓
✓
✓
SWAGS [44]
✓
✓
✓
STG [45]
✓
✓
✓
4D-Rotor [46]
✓
✓
✓
3DGStream [47]
✓
✓
✓
ED3DGS [48]
✓
✓
✓
GaGS [49]
✓
✓
✓
R3DG [50]
✓
✓
✓
SP-GS [51]
✓
✓
✓
AmbientGaussian [52]
✓
✓
✓
DGM [53]
✓
✓
✓
GS-LK [54]
✓
✓
✓
S4D [55]
✓
✓
✓
Gaussian [27] and Street Gaussians [28] leverage a compos-
ite dynamic Gaussian graph to represent multiple moving
objects across time. HUGS [29] extends 3DGS to model
camera exposure on dynamic scenes and utilizes optical
flow prediction for dynamic separation. Efficient 3DG [40]
models the temporal changes in position dynamics using
Fourier approximation. STG [45] stores features instead of
SH coefficients in each Gaussian to accurately encode view-
and time-dependent radiance.
Deformation-based methods model motions as defor-
mations relative to the canonical space of previous ob-
servations that represent a static field. S3Gaussian [31]
and 4DGaussians [38] employ a multi-resolution spatial-
temporal field network to represent dynamic 3D scenes
following Hexplane [56] and an lightweight MLP to de-
code deformation. 4DGF [32] utilizes neural fields to rep-
resent sequence- and object-specific appearance and geom-
etry variations. AutoSplat [35] estimates residual SH for
each foreground Gaussian to model the dynamic appear-
ance of foreground objects. SC-GS [41] introduces sparse
control points together with an MLP for modeling scene
motion. Gaussian-Flow [42] models time-dependent resid-
uals of each Gaussian attribute by a polynomial fitting
in the time domain, and a Fourier series fitting in the
frequency domain. SWAGS [44] partitions the sequence
into windows and trains a separate dynamic 3DGS model
for each window, allowing the canonical representation
to change. 3DGStream [47] employs neural transformation
cache (NTC) to model the translations and rotations of
3DGS. ED3DGS [48] introduces coarse and fine temporal
embeddings to represent the slow and fast state of the dy-
namic scene. GaGS [49] extracts 3D geometry features and
integrates them in learning the 3D deformation. GS-LK [54]
introduces an analytical regularization of the warp canoni-
cal field in dynamic 3DGS by deriving a Lucas-Kanade style
velocity field. S4D [55] employs partially learnable control
points for local 6-DoF motion representation.
4D Gaussian methods consider the spacetime as an en-
tirety and incorporate a time dimension into 3D Gaussian
primitives, forming 4D Gaussian primitives for dynamic
modeling. P4DGS [39] employs a 4D Gaussian parame-
terized by anisotropic ellipses that can rotate arbitrarily
in space and time, as well as view-dependent and time-
evolved appearance represented by 4D SH coefficients. In-
stead of using isoclinic quaternions for 4D rotation represen-
tation as in P4DGS [39], 4D-Rotor [46] introduces 4D rotors
to characterize the 4D rotations motivated by [57], achieving
decoupled spatial and temporal rotations.
Current 3DGS dynamic modeling methods have demon-
strated their capability to reconstruct dynamic scenes. In
small-scale scenes, these methods can reconstruct both dy-
namic and static components in a unified manner. How-
ever, when dealing with larger-scale autonomous driving
scenarios, the computational burden of unified reconstruc-
tion becomes increasingly high. To address this issue, addi-
tional prior information is required to distinguish between
dynamic and static regions, which are then reconstructed
separately. The limitation of these methods lies in their
reliance on additional prior information, such as 3D bound-
ing boxes, which are not easily accessible. Consequently,
the future development of dynamic reconstruction, besides
enhancing the precision of dynamic modeling, is to leverage
the geometry modeling of 3DGS for larger-scale dynamic
reconstruction with minimal prior knowledge.
3.1.2
Segmentation & Editing
The timeline of the scene segmentation and editing is illus-
trated in Fig. 5.

<!-- page 6 -->
6
2024
CoSSegGaussians
(Dou et al.)
SAGD
(Hu et al.)
Gaussian Grouping
(Ye et al.)
3DG Seg
(Lan et al.)
SAGA
(Cen et al.)
CGC
(Silva et al.)
EgoLifter
(Gu et al.)
Gaga
(Lyu et al.)
CLIP-GS
(Liao et al.)
Gscream
(Wang et al.)
TIP-Editor
(Zhuang et al.)
GSEdit
(Palandra et al.)
GaussCtrl
(Wu et al.)
VcEdit
(Wang et al.)
GET
(Fang et al.)
Point'n Move
(Huang et al.)
FMGS
(Li et al.)
Semantic Gaussians
(Guo et al.)
GESC
(Chen et al.)
StyleGaussian
(Liu et al.)
RT-GS2
(Jurca et al.)
OpenGaussian
(Wu et al.)
Texture-GS
(Xu et al.)
Feature Splatting
(Qiu et al.)
D-MiSo
(Waczyńska et al.)
DGE
(Chen et al.)
TIGER
(Xu et al.)
TrAME
(Luo et al.)
StylizedGS
(Zhang et al.)
GSS
(Saroha et al.)
SA4D
(Ji et al.)
GaussianBeV
(Chabot et al.)
Click-Gaussian
(Choi et al.)
ICE-G
(Jaganathan et al.)
ReGS
(Mei et al.)
StyleSplat
(Jain et al.)
3DEgo
(Khalid et al.)
Feature 3DGS
(Zhou et al.)
InstantStyleGaussian
(Yu et al.)
LGS
(Xiao et al.)
Scene Editing
Scene Segmentation
2023
Fig. 5: Chronological: 3DGS for Scene Segmentation and Editing.
TABLE 3: Categorization: 3DGS for Scene Segmentation.
Methods
Semantic representation
Multi-view Semantic Consistency
Semantic
Feature
MLP
Prior
Contrastive
3D Spatial
Labels
Embedding
Learning
Association
Gaussian Grouping [58]
✓
✓
SAGA [59]
✓
✓
Feature 3DGS [60]
✓
✓
3DG Seg [61]
✓
✓
CoSSegGaussians [62]
✓
✓
SAGD [63]
✓
✓
Semantic Gaussians [64]
✓
✓
EgoLifter [65]
✓
✓
Gaga [66]
✓
✓
CGC [67]
✓
✓
CLIP-GS [68]
✓
✓
FMGS [69]
✓
✓
RT-GS2 [70]
✓
✓
OpenGaussian [71]
✓
✓
Click-Gaussian [72]
✓
✓
SA4D [73]
✓
✓
GaussianBeV [74]
✓
✓
Scene Segmentation.
Scene segmentation divides an ob-
served scene into distinct components, each representing
a unique semantic category. Unlike 2D segmentation, 3D
segmentation better addresses the operational and naviga-
tional needs of robots in real-world environments. 3DGS
provides an advanced scene representation framework that
enables 3D semantic segmentation based on 2D images.
We categorize current 3DGS segmentation methods by two
main criteria: (i) the modeling approach for 3DGS semantic
representation and (ii) methods for maintaining consistent
semantic labels across multiple 2D image inputs, as outlined
in Table 3. Specifically, semantic representation approaches
fall into three categories: semantic labels, feature embed-
dings, and MLP-based models. The first two incorporate
semantic labels and feature embeddings directly into 3D
Gaussian primitives as additional attributes, while the third
relies on an MLP network for semantic modeling.
Most 3DGS segmentation methods currently depend
on the SAM model [75] to supply 2D semantic labels for
open-vocabulary segmentation. However, since the SAM
model ensures semantic consistency only within individual
images, corresponding semantic regions across different im-
ages may not align consistently, leading to ambiguities in 3D
semantic modeling. To address this, existing 3DGS methods
use priors, contrastive learning, or 3D spatial association
techniques to achieve multi-view semantic consistency in
3D semantic segmentation.
Prior-based methods employ pretrained tracker [76] or
input multi-view consistent 2D masks to propagate and as-
sociate masks across views. Gaussian Grouping [58] utilizes
a 2D identity loss and a 3D regularization loss for Gaussian
optimization, leveraging the coherent segmentation across
views. SAGD [63] incorporates a Gaussian decomposition
module to address boundary roughness in 3D segmentation.
CoSSegGaussians [62] designs a multi-scale spatial and se-
mantic Gaussian features fusion module to achieve compact
segmentation. CLIP-GS [68] introduces coherent semantic
regularization by incorporating the semantics of adjacent
views to eliminate semantic ambiguity within the same
object. SA4D [73] introduces a temporal identity feature field
to learn Gaussians’ identity information across time for 4D
segmentation. GaussianBeV [74] transforms image features
into bird’s-eye view (BEV) Gaussian representation for BEV
segmentation in an end-to-end manner.
Contrastive learning works align features of correspond-
ing masks while separating features of different masks in
the embedding space to achieve cross-view semantic consis-
tency. For semantic gaussian optimization, SAGA [59] intro-
duces the correspondence loss based on the principle that
pixels with a higher intersection over union (IoU) should
have more similar features. OpenGaussian [71] proposes
an intra-mask smoothing loss and inter-mask contrastive
loss to promote feature diversity among different instances.
CGC [67] presents a spatial-similarity regularization loss
to enforce the spatial continuity of feature vectors, ad-
dressing misclassification in regions where the scene is not
well observed. Moreover, RT-GS2 [70] fuses view-dependent
features extracted from images and view-independent 3D
Gaussian features obtained from contrastive learning to
enhance semantic consistency across different views. Click-
Gaussian [72] incorporates coarse-to-fine level features into
Gaussian and clusters global features from noisy 2D seg-
ments across views to enhance global semantic consistency.
3D spatial association methods employ 3D semantic fea-
ture extraction network or label voting in spatial coordinates
to achieve semantic consistency. Semantic Gaussians [64]
constructs loss between 3D features obtained from 3D se-
mantic network and mapped 3D Gaussian features from
2D features projection to optimize 3DGS semantic repre-
sentation. Gaga [66] employs 3D-aware mask association
process, where a 3D-aware memory bank is used to assign
a consistent group ID based on the overlap ratio of shared
3D Gaussians between each mask and existing groups in the
memory bank. FMGS [69] integrates semantic and language
representation for scene understanding by distilling vision-
language features from foundation models CLIP [77] and
DINO [78] into 3DGS. Additionally, this work enhances
spatial precision through a pixel alignment loss leveraging
DINO features.
In summary, 3DGS enables faster and more accurate 3D
semantic modeling for semantic segmentation compared to
other scene representations. This improvement stems from

<!-- page 7 -->
7
(a) Object editing
(b) Scene style editing
Fig. 6: An illustration of 3DGS for scene editing. Fig. 6a and
Fig. 6b are originally shown in [79] and [80], respectively.
the Gaussian radiance field representation in 3DGS, which
supports detailed scene modeling, and its efficient rendering
capability, which accelerates optimization. Additionally, the
explicit structure of Gaussians and 3DGS-based semantic
segmentation results make it straightforward to edit and
manipulate semantic objects within the scene representa-
tion. This functionality enhances 3DGS’s applicability in
various downstream robotic tasks, such as manipulation
and autonomous navigation, where understanding and in-
teracting with semantic entities in the environment are
essential.
Scene Editing.
Scene editing involves modifying scene
elements based on user prompts to achieve desired effects.
Edited scenes can serve as valuable training resources for
robots, offering a practical alternative when real-world data
collection is challenging or time-consuming. The 3DGS rep-
resentation simplifies the editing process by utilizing the
explicit structure of Gaussians, allowing for direct relocation
of Gaussian elements to facilitate scene modifications. We
categorize related works into object editing and scene style
editing, as shown in Fig. 6.
Object editing methods includes object insertion and re-
moval [79], [81], [82], [83] as well as appearance and texture
editing [84]. The challenges of object insertion and removal
editing are the preservation of geometric consistency and
the maintenance of texture coherence, due to the discrete
properties of Gaussian primitives. GScream [79] employs
cross-attention feature regularization to propagate the ac-
curate texture in the surrounding region into the in-painted
region, ensuring texture coherence of the Gaussian represen-
tation. Feature Splatting [83] incorporates visual-language
embedding into 3D Gaussian for text-prompt editing. For
appearance and texture editing, Texture-GS [84] establishes
a connection between geometry (3D Gaussians) and appear-
ance (2D texture map) to facilitate appearance editing.
Text-driven object editing methods [85], [86], [87], [88],
[89], [90], [91], [92], [93], [94], [95] all leverage pretrained
diffusion model [96], which enables efficient use of text
prompts for precise editing and incorporates rich prior
knowledge to enhance the quality and coherence of the
edited objects. GaussCtrl [87] employs naturally consistent
depth maps obtained from ControlNet [97] to guide geo-
metric consistency. Moreover, this work introduces self and
cross-view attention of latent codes from different views
for appearance consistency. VcEdit [88] and TrAME [93]
employ cross-attention across maps obtained from stages of
diffusion.
Scene style editing methods [80], [98], [99], [100], [101],
[102], [103] generate diverse stylistic scene data based on
style prompts, which can shorten data collection periods
and improve the robustness of the systems trained with this
data for robotic applications.
3.1.3
SLAM
We categorize 3DGS-based SLAM into visual SLAM, multi-
sensor fusion SLAM, semantic SLAM based on the sensor
used and the level of environmental understanding. 3DGS-
based SLAM process is illustrated in Fig. 8. We also present
timeline of the related works in Fig. 7. Compared with
NeRF-based SLAM, 3DGS-based SLAM methods leverage
the explicit representation of 3D Gaussian for unbounded
and photo-realistic mapping.
Visual SLAM. Visual SLAM refers to the process of simul-
taneously performing dense color mapping and localization
of a camera. Considering that accurate depth information is
crucial for providing geometric supervision in constructing
dense Gaussian maps, we categorize our discussion of vi-
sual SLAM into RGB-D SLAM and RGB SLAM, based on
whether the input camera data contains depth information.
RGB-D SLAM methods [104], [105], [106], [107], [108],
[109], [110], [111], [112], [113], [114], [115], [116], [117],
[118] have accurate depth input, which can provide good
geometric constraints for dense mapping and pose estima-
tion. For SLAM process, it is crucial to determine when
to expand the map and how to achieve precise tracking
results. SplaTAM [104] employs silhouette rendering of the
existing Gaussian map to identify which portions of the
scene are new content, thereby guiding the expansion of
the map and the optimization of camera poses. Gaussian-
SLAM [105] and NGM-SLAM [106] focus on building Gaus-
sian submaps progressively to achieve local map opti-
mization. MG-SLAM [107] incorporates structure prior of
the scene to generate constraints that address gaps and
imperfections of the reconstructed map. In addition, CG-
SLAM [109] proposes a novel depth uncertainty model to
build up a consistent and stable 3D Gaussian map. I2-
SLAM [116] integrates the image formation process into
SLAM to overcome motion blur and varying appearances.
LoopSplat [117] detects loop closure online and computes
relative loop edge constraints between submaps via 3DGS
registration for global map consistency.
For accurate tracking, GS-SLAM [110] employs a coarse-
to-fine approach to avoid drifted camera tracking caused
by artifacts in images. GS-ICP SLAM [111] leverages 3D
explicit representation of 3DGS for tracking, achieved by
utilizing G-ICP [119] for Gaussian map matching to directly
regress estimated camera poses. TAMBRIDGE [112] jointly
optimizes sparse re-projection and dense rendering errors,
resulting in reduced cumulative errors in tracking. While
these advancements improve SLAM accuracy, detailed 3D

<!-- page 8 -->
8
SemGauss-SLAM
(Zhu et al.)
MM3DGS SLAM
(Sun et al.)
SplaTAM
(Keetha et al.)
NEDS-SLAM
(Ji et al.)
SGS-SLAM
(Li et al.)
Multi-sensor Fusion SLAM
Semantic SLAM
Visual SLAM
MonoGS
(Matsuki et al.)
Gaussian-SLAM
(Yugay et al.)
GS-SLAM
(Yan et al.)
GS-ICP SLAM
(Ha et al.)
Photo-SLAM
(Huang et al.)
CG-SLAM
(Hu et al.)
HF-SLAM
(Sun et al.)
MM-Gaussian
(Wu et al.)
Gaussian-LIC
(Lang et al.)
LIV-GaussMap
(Hong et al.)
Compact-SLAM
(Deng et al.)
RTG-SLAM
(Peng et al.)
MGS-SLAM
(Zhu et al.)
NGM-SLAM
(Li et al.)
MG-SLAM
(Liu et al.)
Splat-SLAM
(Sandström et al.)
MotionGS
(Guo et al.)
MonoG-SLAM
(Lan et al.)
TAMBRIDGE
(Jiang et al.)
2023
2024
GS3LAM
(Li et al.)
LoopSplat
(Zhu et al.)
PD-SLAM
(Qu et al.)
IG-SLAM
(Sarikamis et al.)
GSFusion
(Wei et al.)
I2-SLAM
(Bae et al.)
Fig. 7: Chronological: 3DGS for SLAM.
Fig. 8: An illustration of 3DGS for SLAM. Part of images are
taken from SplaTAM [104].
Gaussian maps generated in the SLAM process require
significant memory resources. To address this, Compact-
SLAM [113] proposes a sliding window-based online mask-
ing method to remove redundant Gaussian ellipsoids for
compact representation. RTG-SLAM [114] uses a single
opaque Gaussian instead of multiple overlapping Gaussians
to fit a local region of the surface for reducing memory
consumption in mapping.
RGB SLAM methods [120], [121], [122], [123], [124],
[125], [126] lack accurate depth input, so it requires ad-
ditional information such as multi-view constraints or
depth estimation to recover the 3D geometry of the scene.
MonoGS [120] and MotionGS [121] employ a regulariza-
tion term and multi-view optimization to constrain scene
geometry information in scenes where depth is unknown.
Photo-SLAM [122] minimizes the reprojection error be-
tween matched 2D geometric keypoints in the frame and
corresponding 3D points to achieve geometric consistency.
Moreover, MGS-SLAM [123] utilizes depth estimation and
DPVO [127] to recover 3D geometry of the scene. MonoG-
SLAM [124] employs patch graph based on DPVO [127] and
CLIP [77]-based loop closure optimization to guide the esti-
mation of the scene geometry. Splat-SLAM [125] introduces
dense optical flow estimation and DSPO (disparity, scale
and pose optimization) for accurate depth recovery.
The accuracy of existing 3DGS-based visual SLAM is
highly dependent on precise depth information. RGB SLAM
methods, due to the absence of accurate depth informa-
tion, often exhibit errors in 3DGS geometric reconstruc-
tion. Although depth estimation techniques can provide
depth information for RGB SLAM, their limited accuracy
leads to decreased SLAM performance. Moreover, current
3DGS-based visual SLAM systems are tested and evaluated
mostly in indoor environments, as depth measurements are
unreliable in outdoor scenes. Therefore, the unsolved key
problem of visual SLAM is to enhance geometric reconstruc-
tion accuracy despite inaccurate depth information, thereby
achieving high-precision SLAM in various environments.
Multi-sensor Fusion SLAM.
Multi-sensor Fusion SLAM
integrates data from different sensors to achieve accurate
mapping and robust tracking in SLAM system. We classify
multi-sensor fusion SLAM methods into LiDAR-based and
image depth estimation-based, depending on the primary sen-
sor modality used for 3DGS geometry reconstruction.
LiDAR-based methods use accurate point cloud ob-
tained from LiDAR as the initial input for 3D Gaussian
geometry representation. LIV-GaussMap [128] utilizes point
cloud obtained from an IESKF-based LiDAR-inertial sys-
tem to provide an initial Gaussian structure for the scene.
Gaussian-LIC [129] performs LiDAR-Inertial-Camera odom-
etry for tracking. LiDAR points are projected onto the cor-
responding image, where they are colored by querying the
pixel values, and then used to initialize 3D Gaussian. MM-
Gaussian [130] performs tracking using point cloud registra-
tion algorithm [131] and utilizes multi-frame camera con-
straints for relocalization when the tracking module fails.
Image depth estimation-based methods employ monocular
dense depth estimation results as geometric supervision for
constructing Gaussian map. MM3DGS SLAM [132] utilizes
IMU (Inertial Measurement Unit) pre-integration for initial
pose estimation and constructs loss between rendering and
observations for pose optimization. As depth estimation
outputs a relative depth, Pearson correlation coefficient is
used to compute the depth loss between estimated and
rendered depth maps with actual scale information.
Semantic SLAM.
Semantic SLAM incorporates seman-
tic understanding of the environment into map construc-
tion and estimates camera pose simultaneously. Compared
with visual SLAM and multi-sensor fusion SLAM, seman-
tic SLAM enables dense semantic mapping of the scene,
which is essential for downstream tasks such as naviga-
tion and manipulation. As the original 3DGS representa-
tion lacks semantic information, two methods have been
developed in 3DGS-based semantic SLAM to incorporate
semantics: color-based and feature-based. For color-based
method, SGS-SLAM [133] utilizes semantic color associated
with the Gaussian for semantic representation. However,
this color-based semantic modeling approach overlooks the

<!-- page 9 -->
9
Splat-Nav
(Chen et al.)
iComMa
(Sun et al.)
GaussianGrasper
(Zheng et al.)
Manipulation
Path Planning
Localization
CF-3DG
(Fu et al.)
GGRt
(Li et al.)
Beyond Uncertainty
(Liu et al.)
GaussNav
(Lei et al.)
ManiGaussian
(Lu et al.)
3DGS-ReLoc
(Jiang et al.)
2023
2024
Splat-MOVER
(Shorinwa et al.)
Object-Aware GS
(Li et al.)
GS-Planner
(Jin et al.)
COGS
(Jiang et al.)
EVR
(Liu et al.)
GaussReg
(Chang et al.)
6DGS
(Bortolon et al.)
GSLoc
(Liu et al.)
Fig. 9: Chronological: 3DGS for Scene Interaction.
higher-level information inherent in semantics. For feature-
based semantic integration, SemGauss-SLAM [134] incor-
porates semantic embedding into 3D Gaussian for seman-
tic representation and performs semantic-informed bundle
adjustment using multi-view constraints to achieve high-
accuracy semantic SLAM. NEDS-SLAM [135] proposes a
fusion module that combines semantic features with ap-
pearance features to address the spatial inconsistency of
semantic features, inspired by [136]. GS3LAM [137] intro-
duces depth-adaptive scale regularization to reduce the
blurring of geometric surfaces induced by irregular Gaus-
sian scales within semantic gaussian. LEGS [138] introduces
a language-embedded Gaussian splat representation for se-
mantic mapping.
3.2
Scene Interaction
Navigation and manipulation are fundamental aspects of
robotic interaction with the environment. The timeline for
related works is shown in Fig. 9.
3.2.1
Manipulation
Manipulation refers to using robotic arms or grippers to
perform various tasks, substituting for human hands. Un-
like NeRF-based manipulation approaches, 3DGS employs
an explicit radiance field representation which constructs
the scene and provides direct access to the positional infor-
mation of objects within it. Manipulation tasks can be cat-
egorized into single-stage and multi-stage based on whether
the task requires consideration of dynamic environmental
changes. These changes are caused by object movement re-
sulting from the manipulation itself, as illustrated in Fig. 10.
In single-stage manipulation, the grasping task is com-
pleted through a single, continuous motion, so the en-
vironment is considered static during the process. Gaus-
sianGrasper [139] reconstructs a 3D Gaussian feature field
via efficient feature distillation to support language-guided
manipulation tasks and uses rendered normals to filter out
unfeasible grasp poses.
For multi-stage manipulation, the task is accomplished
through a sequence of actions where the object’s move-
ment during each stage results in dynamic changes to
the environment. ManiGaussian [141] proposes dynamic
3DGS framework to model the scene-level spatiotemporal
dynamics and builds a Gaussian world model to parame-
terize distributions in dynamic 3DGS model for multi-task
robotic manipulation. Object-Aware GS [142] models the
Gaussian representation as time-variant and employs object-
centric dynamic updates for dynamic modeling of multi-
stage manipulation. Instead of modeling dynamic changes,
(a) Single-stage manipulation
(b) Multi-stage manipulation
Fig. 10: An illustration of 3DGS for manipulation. Fig.
10a and Fig. 10b are originally shown in [139] and [140],
respectively.
Splat-MOVER [140] employs a scene-editing module using
3D semantic masking and infilling to visualize the motions
of the objects that result from the robot’s interactions with
the environment. Moreover, this work introduces GSplat
representation which distills latent codes for language se-
mantics and grasp affordance into the 3D scene for scene
understanding.
3.2.2
Navigation
Navigation in robotics involves two essential and intercon-
nected components: localization and path planning. Localiza-
tion deals with the challenge of locating the robot’s own
position within the environment. Based on the localization
result, the robot performs path planning, which refers to
the process of determining an optimal route to reach the
destination. 3DGS serves as a detailed scene representation
for high-precision navigation tasks.
Localization.
Localization refers to estimating a 6 Degree-
Of-Freedom (DoF) pose (position and orientation) through
the processing of sensor data. We categorize 3DGS-based
localization into known map-based localization and relative
pose regression based on whether the prior global map is
available, as shown in Fig. 12.
For known map-based localization, iComMa [143] com-
putes the residuals between the query image and the ren-
dered image obtained from a prebuilt Gaussian map to
optimize the camera pose. 3DGS-ReLoc [145] stores 3DGS
map as a 2D voxel map with a KD-tree for efficient spatial
queries and achieves relocalization by brute-force search to
match the query image within the global map. Liu et al. [146]
generate pseudo scene coordinates from 3DGS for initializ-
ing and enhancing scene coordinate regression. 6DGS [147]
estimates the camera location by selecting a bundle of rays
projected from the ellipsoid surface of Gaussian map and
learning an attention map to output ray pixel correspon-
dences for pose optimization.
In terms of relative pose regression, CF-3DG [148] esti-
mates the relative camera pose that can transform the local
3D Gaussian map of the last frame to render the pixels

<!-- page 10 -->
10
2023
BAD-Gaussians
(Zhao et al.)
DeblurGS
(Oh et al.)
RGS
(Darmon et al.)
3DGS-deblur
(Seiskari et al.)
Deblur-GS
(Chen et al.)
BAGS
(Peng et al.)
CRiM-GS
(Lee et al.)
DoGaussian
(Chen et al.)
Octree-GS
(Ren et al.)
Fed3DGS
(Suzuki et al.)
PyGS
(Wang et al.)
H3DGS
(Kerbl et al.)
CityGaussian
(Liu et al.)
FSGS
(Zhu et al.)
DNGaussian
(Li et al.)
CoherentGS
(Paliwal et al.)
InstantSplat
(Fan et al.)
DepthRegGS
(Chung et al.)
MVSplat
(Chen et al.)
CoR-GS
(Zhang et al.)
SparseGS
(Xiong et al.)
Scaffold-GS
(Lu et al.)
RDO-Gaussian
(Wang et al.)
RadSplat
(Niemeyer et al.)
PUP 3D-GS
(Hanson et al.)
CompGS
(Liu et al.)
F-3DGS
(Sun et al.)
ContextGS
(Wang et al.)
Reduced 3DGS
(Papantonakis et al.)
Taming 3DGS
(Mallick et al.)
RN-Gaussian
(Mahmoud et al.)
C3DGS
(Niedermayr et al.)
HAC
(Chen et al.)
Compact3D
(Navaneet et al.)
Compact-3DGS
(Lee et al.)
SOGS
(Morgenstern et al.)
EfficientGS
(Liu et al.)
LightGaussian
(Fan et al.)
2024
Memory Efficiency
Few-Shot
Large-Scale
Motion-Blurred
VastGaussian
(Lin et al.)
LoopSparseGS
(Bao et al.)
Fig. 11: Chronological: Advance of 3DGS.
(a) Known map-based localization
(b) Relative Pose Regression
Fig. 12: An illustration of 3DGS for localization. Fig. 12a and
Fig. 12b are originally shown in [143] and [144], respectively.
that align with the current frame. GGRt [149] designs a
joint learning framework that consists of an iterative pose
optimization network that estimates relative poses and a
generalizable 3D-Gaussians model that predicts Gaussians.
COGS [144] detects 2D correspondences between training
views and the corresponding rendered images to regress
relative pose. GaussReg [150] explores the registration of 3D
scenes using 3DGS representation to estimate the relative
pose of the scenes. GSLoc [151] incorporates an exposure-
adaptive module into the 3DGS model to improve the
robustness of matching between two images under domain
shift, achieving accurate pose regression of images.
Path planning.
We categorize path planning into active
planning and non-active planning based on whether the
robot actively explores the environment for reconstruction
as well as planning.
In terms of active planning, GS-Planner [152] maintains
a voxel map to represent unobserved volumes. This voxel
map is integrated into the splatting process, enabling the
exploration of unobserved space. Moreover, this work lever-
ages physical concept of opacity to formulate a chance
constraint for safe active planning in 3DGS maps. For
non-active planning, GaussNav [153] constructs a semantic
Gaussian map and transfers this map into 2D BEV grids
Fig. 13: An illustration of 3DGS for deblurring motion blur.
Figure is originally shown in [156].
for navigation. Furthermore, a set of descriptive images is
generated by rendering the object from multiple viewpoints.
These images are then used to match and identify the
target position for path planning. Splat-Nav [154] generates
a safe path by discretizing free space on a Gaussian map
for safe navigation. This discretization is achieved through
intersection tests between Gaussian ellipsoids. Beyond Un-
certainty [155] leverages 3DGS map to dynamically assess
collision risks at each waypoint and guides risk-aware next-
best-view selection for efficient and safe robot navigation.
4
ADVANCE OF 3DGS IN ROBOTICS
While vanilla 3DGS [2] provides a foundation for 3D scene
representation, it has limitations that can impact its effec-
tiveness in robotics applications. To address these, various
advanced models have introduced adaptive modifications,
improving 3DGS’s adaptability, memory efficiency, and data
efficiency for real-world use. Fig. 11 highlights a timeline
of developments that enhance 3DGS specifically for robotic
applications, focusing on key improvements to make it more
resilient and efficient in complex environments.
4.1
Adaptability
Enhancing the adaptability of vanilla 3DGS involves im-
proving its performance in large-scale environment and its
resilience to motion blur, enabling more effectiveness and
reliability across diverse and unpredictable scenarios.
4.1.1
Motion-Blurred
Motion blur of captured images is a common challenge in
robotics, primarily caused by high-speed robot movements
and slow shutter speed, resulting in degraded image qual-
ity. Consequently, deblurring is essential to restore image
quality and enhance visual perception for robotic systems.
Deblurring methods can be divided into two categories:

<!-- page 11 -->
11
(a) Block separation
(b) Level-of-Detail
Fig. 14: An illustration of 3DGS for large-scale reconstruc-
tion. Fig. 14a and Fig. 14b are originally shown in [164] and
[165], respectively.
physical modeling, which focuses on understanding and sim-
ulating the blurring process based on the formation of
motion blur, and implicit modeling, which leverages MLP
networks to directly learn the mapping between blurred and
sharp images without explicitly modeling the underlying
physical process, as illustrated in Fig. 13.
Physical modeling methods [156], [157], [158] simulate
motion-blurred images by averaging virtual sharp images
captured during the camera exposure time. These methods
then construct loss between simulated and observed blurry
images for optimization of Gaussian representation and
camera pose, ensuring that the constructed scene is sharp
and free from motion blur. RGS [159] models motion blur
as a Gaussian distribution over camera poses to obtain the
expected image at the given noise for optimization. 3DGS-
deblur [160] simplifies motion blur modeling by approxi-
mating motion in pixel coordinates and adjusting the Gaus-
sian means to reflect this movement. CRiM-GS [161] applies
neural ODEs [162] to model the continuous camera motion
trajectory during the exposure time and achieves deblurred
images by rendering and averaging images from multiple
poses sampled along this trajectory. In terms of implicit
modeling, BAGS [163] introduces a blur proposal network
to model image blur and produces a quality-assessing mask
that indicates regions where blur occur.
4.1.2
Large-Scale
Vanilla 3DGS representation requires millions of 3D Gaus-
sians for large-scale reconstruction, leading to high GPU
memory demands for training, as well as long training and
rendering time. To address large-scale reconstruction, exist-
ing methods [164], [165], [166], [167], [168], [169], [170] di-
vide the scene into independent blocks for separate training
(Block separation), and model the scene with hierarchical
resolution levels (Level-of-Detail), as shown in Fig. 14.
Fig. 15: An illustration of 3DGS for memery efficiency.
Subplot(1) to subplot(4) are extracted from [171], [172], [173],
[174], respectively.
DoGaussian [164], H3DGS [167], and CityGS [166] em-
ploys a divide-and-conquer strategy that partitions the
scene into spatially adjacent blocks, which are optimized
independently and in parallel. Fed3DGS [168] utilizes de-
centralized processing of large-scale data across millions
of clients to reduce the computational load on a central
server. Octree-GS [165] incorporates an octree structure for
multiple-level scene representation and employs level-of-
detail decomposition for efficient rendering. PyGS [169]
employs a hierarchical structure of 3D Gaussians organized
into pyramid levels to represent scenes at varying levels
of detail for large-scale scene representation. VastGaus-
sian [170] introduces a progressive partitioning strategy to
divide a large scene into multiple cells for parallel optimiza-
tion.
4.2
Efficiency
Vanilla 3DGS suffers from significant storage demands due
to its explicit representation and requires extensive multi-
view information for scene modeling. However, in real-
world robotic applications, this substantial storage require-
ment is inefficient for storing global maps. Additionally, the
need to obtain extensive multi-view data for reconstruction
leads to data inefficiency. Therefore, improving the effi-
ciency of 3DGS in robotics focuses on two main aspects:
memory efficiency, which aims to reduce the large storage
demands, and few-shot, which enhances data utilization by
enabling effective reconstruction from minimal multi-view
information.
4.2.1
Memery Efficiency
Explicit representation of 3D Gaussians requires a signifi-
cant amount of storage space. To address this issue, existing
methods primarily adopt four approaches: pruning, vector
quantization, anchor-based, and low-dimensional compression, to
reduce the storage space required for 3D Gaussian scene
representation in robotic applications, as shown in Fig. 15.
Intuitively, reducing the number of 3D Gaussian primi-
tives that contribute little to the scene can decrease the over-
all storage requirements, which refers to as pruning [171],

<!-- page 12 -->
12
[175], [176], [177], [178], [179], [180], [181], [182]. Compact-
3DGS [171] and RDO-Gaussian [175] remove Gaussians
with small scales and low opacities. LightGaussian [176],
RadSplat [177], and EfficientGS [178] prune Gaussians that
have low ray-contribution to the pixels across all training
views. PUP 3D-GS [179] employs a sensitivity score de-
rived from Hessian matrix of reconstruction errors, pruning
Gaussians with higher spatial uncertainty and lesser con-
tributions to reconstruction quality. Reduced 3DGS [180]
identifies regions that are densely populated with Gaus-
sian primitives and prunes Gaussians that overlap signifi-
cantly with other Gaussians. RN-Gaussian [181] and Taming
3DGS [182] restrict the cloning and splitting of Gaussians
based on position and correlation with existing Gaussians
to reduce the number of Gaussian. Moreover, Vector Quan-
tization methods [171], [172], [180], [183] convert Gaussian
parameters into codebooks to represent Gaussian attributes
compactly.
Anchor-based methods [173], [184], [185], [186] employ
a set of anchor primitives to cluster related nearby 3D
Gaussians and predict their attributes from anchors’ at-
tributes, resulting in memory-efficient 3D scene represen-
tation. HAC [184] leverages relations between the unorga-
nized anchors and the structured hash grid for context mod-
eling of anchor attributes. ContextGS [186] divides anchors
into multiple levels for compact representation. Moreover,
low-dimensional compression methods [174], [187] repre-
sent 3D Gaussian in 1D or 2D space for compact storage.
SOGS [187] maps originally unstructured 3D Gaussians to
2D grids for reducing memory. F-3DGS [174] proposes a
factorized coordinate scheme that maintains 1D or 2D coor-
dinates in each axis or plane and generates 3D coordinates
by a tensor product.
4.2.2
Few-Shot
Novel view rendering from few-shot reconstruction is chal-
lenging due to the sparse information available. In scenarios
where only limited observations are present, vanilla 3DGS
faces two challenges: (1) Sparse SfM points derived from
few-shot images fail to represent the global geometry for
Gaussian initialization. (2) Leveraging a few images for opti-
mization can lead to overfitting. To address these challenges,
few-shot methods [188], [189], [190], [191], [192], [193], [194],
[195], [196] incorporates additional constraints and prior
into SfM initialization and Gaussian optimization.
FSGS [188] inserts new Gaussians near existing ones
based on their proximity to deal with sparse initial point
sets and generates unseen viewpoints for training to ad-
dress overfitting. DepthRegGS [189] employs depth-guided
optimization to mitigate overfitting. CoherentGS [190] pro-
poses depth-based initialization to achieve dense SfM
points. MVSplat [191] extracts multi-view image features
to construct per-view cost volumes and predicts per-view
depth maps for few-shot reconstruction. SparseGS [192]
integrates depth priors with generative and explicit con-
straints to enhance consistency from unseen viewpoints.
LoopSparseGS [193] incorporates iteratively rendered im-
ages with training images into SfM to densify the initialized
point cloud. Additionally, this work leverages window-
based dense monocular depth to provide precise geometric
supervision for Gaussian optimization.
5
DATASETS AND PERFORMANCE EVALUATION
In this section, we present a detailed summary of the
datasets commonly used in robotics. Moreover, we provide
performance comparison and evaluation of key modules in
robotics, including mapping and localization, perception,
manipulation and navigation. These modules are funda-
mental and crucial to the functionality of intelligent robotic
systems. By comparing the performance of these modules,
we aim to offer an overview of the current state of research
in robotics based on 3DGS representation. In terms of per-
ception, we only report on scene segmentation, as there are
currently no other 3DGS-based perception methods avail-
able at the time of this paper’s completion.
5.1
SLAM Evaluation
Datasets. Existing 3DGS-based visual SLAM and semantic
SLAM methods use indoor scene datasets for evaluation, in-
cluding Replica [197], ScanNet [198], and TUM RGB-D [199].
As TUM RGB-D dataset [199] lacks semantic annotations,
it is generally not used for benchmarking semantic SLAM
methods. For multi-sensor fusion SLAM methods, evalu-
ations are conducted on different outdoor scene datasets
based on the specific sensors used, rather than a unified
dataset. Detailed descriptions of the SLAM datasets are
provided below.
• Replica [197] is an RGB-D dataset that contains 18 in-
door scene reconstructions at room and building scales.
Each scene consists of dense mesh, high-dynamic-range
(HDR) textures, per-primitive semantic class and in-
stance information.
• ScanNet dataset [198] contains RGB-D frames and IMU
data of 2.5M views in 1513 scenes, each annotated
with 3D camera poses, surface reconstructions, textured
meshes, and semantic segmentations.
• TUM RGB-D [199] is an RGB-D dataset that consists
of 39 sequences recorded in an office environment and
an industrial hall. RGB-D data are captured from the
Kinect. Ground truth pose estimates are obtained from
the motion capture system.
Metrics. Reconstruction and tracking metrics are employed
for evaluating SLAM accuracy. Specifically, Depth L1 (cm)
metric is used for reconstruction evaluation, which is the
average absolute error between ground truth depth and
reconstructed depth. ATE RMSE (cm) [199] is tracking metric
that quantifies the error between the estimated trajectory
and the ground truth trajectory. For SLAM systems, real-
time performance is crucial, and metric FPS is utilized for
evaluating the time consumption of SLAM process. In addi-
tion, mIoU (%) is used for semantic segmentation evaluation
in semantic SLAM that measures the average percentage
of overlap between the predicted and ground truth areas
across different classes. Moreover, as most 3DGS-based
SLAM methods report the rendering performance of SLAM
mapping results, we also include rendering metrics in the
SLAM evaluation. Peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR[dB]),
structural similarity (SSIM) [200], and learned perceptual
image patch similarity (LPIPS) [201] are rendering metrics.
Results. As visual SLAM and semantic SLAM methods are
mostly tested on Replica dataset [197], we present perfor-
mance comparison on Replica regarding SLAM metrics, as

<!-- page 13 -->
13
TABLE 4: SLAM performance comparison. The results are
average of 8 scenes on Replica dataset [197]. Best results are
highlighted as first , second . These notes also apply to the
other tables.
Methods
Reconstruction
Rendering
Tracking
Segmentation
Depth L1↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
RMSE↓
mIoU↑
Visual SLAM
RGB-D
GS-SLAM [110]
1.16
34.27
0.98
0.08
0.50
–
Photo-SLAM [122]
–
34.96
0.94
0.06
0.60
–
SplaTAM [104]
0.72
34.11
0.97
0.10
0.36
–
Gaussian-SLAM [105]
1.56
38.90
0.99
0.07
0.48
–
MonoGS [120]
–
37.50
0.96
0.07
0.32
–
Compact-SLAM [113]
–
34.44
0.98
0.09
0.33
–
GS-ICP SLAM [111]
–
38.83
0.98
0.04
0.16
–
HF-SLAM [108]
0.52
36.19
0.98
0.05
0.25
–
NGM-SLAM [106]
–
37.43
0.98
0.08
0.51
–
MotionGS [121]
–
39.60
0.98
0.04
0.49
–
RTG-SLAM [114]
–
35.43
0.98
0.11
0.18
–
CG-SLAM [109]
–
–
–
–
0.27
–
LoopSplat [117]
0.51
36.63
0.99
0.11
0.26
–
RGB
Photo-SLAM(RGB) [122]
–
33.30
0.93
0.08
1.09
–
NGM-SLAM(RGB) [106]
–
35.02
0.96
0.13
8.51
–
MGS-SLAM [123]
–
29.90
0.88
0.09
0.32
–
MonoG-SLAM [124]
–
33.59
0.93
0.22
0.32
–
Splat-SLAM [125]
2.41
36.45
0.95
0.06
0.34
–
IG-SLAM [126]
4.33
36.21
0.96
0.05
0.44
–
Semantic
SLAM
SGS-SLAM [133]
0.36
34.66
0.97
0.10
0.41
92.72
SemGauss-SLAM [134]
0.50
35.03
0.98
0.06
0.33
96.34
NEDS-SLAM [135]
0.47
34.76
0.96
0.09
0.35
90.78
GS3LAM [137]
–
36.26
0.99
0.05
0.37
96.63
shown in Table 4. In addition, time consumption results re-
ported in 3DGS SLAM works are obtained from experiments
conducted on different GPUs. Since the computational ca-
pabilities of GPUs vary significantly, it is unfair to directly
compare the real-time performance of SLAM methods based
on these results. Therefore, FPS metric is not reported.
5.2
Scene Reconstruction Evaluation
Datasets.
Indoor reconstruction typically utilizes datasets
similar to those used in SLAM. For outdoor scene recon-
struction, commonly used datasets include KITTI [202],
Waymo [203], nuScenes [204], and Argoverse [205] dataset.
Detailed descriptions of outdoor reconstruction datasets are
shown below.
• KITTI dataset [202] contains data from 4 cameras and 1
LiDAR, consisting of 22 stereo sequences with a total
length of 39.2km. This dataset also comprises 200k 3D
object annotations and 389 optical flow image pairs.
• Waymo dataset [203] contains data from 5 cameras and
5 LiDAR sensors, consisting of 1150 scenes across a
range of urban and suburban geographies. This dataset
is annotated with 2D (camera image) and 3D (LiDAR)
bounding boxes.
• nuScenes dataset [204] contains data from 6 cameras, 5
radars, 1 lidar sensor, and IMU, comprising 1000 scenes,
each fully annotated with 3D bounding boxes for 23
classes and 8 attributes.
• Argoverse dataset [205] contains sequences of LiDAR
measurements, 360◦
images from 7 cameras, and
forward-facing stereo imagery. This dataset also in-
cludes annotations for 290km of mapped lanes and
300k interesting vehicle trajectories.
Metrics.
Rendering metrics PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS are
employed for evaluation.
Results.
In terms of static reconstruction, various meth-
ods use different scenes from these datasets for evaluation
rather than using specific scenes. For dynamic scene re-
construction, most methods employ consistent training and
testing splits on the KITTI dataset [202] for evaluation. We
present performance comparison on KITTI [202] regarding
rendering metrics, as shown in Table 5. Some dynamic scene
TABLE 5: Dynamic scene reconstruction performance com-
parison. The results are novel view rendering performance
on KITTI dataset [202] using 75% and 50% of full data for
training respectively.
Methods
KITTI [75%]
KITTI [50%]
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PSNR [dB]↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
PVG [26]
27.43
0.896
0.114
–
–
–
VDG [33]
25.29
0.851
0.152
–
–
–
Street Gaussians [28]
25.79
0.844
0.081
25.52
0.841
0.084
AutoSplat [35]
26.59
0.913
0.204
26.22
0.907
0.207
4DGF [32]
31.34
0.945
0.026
30.55
0.931
0.028
reconstruction methods that do not report KITTI results are
not displayed in the table.
5.3
Localization Evaluation
Datasets.
Evaluation of localization performance typically
uses Tanks&Temples [206], 7 Scenes [207] datasets, and
autonomous driving datasets that are similar to those used
in outdoor scene reconstruction. Detailed descriptions of
localization datasets are as follows.
• Tanks&Temples dataset [206] contains high-resolution
video sequences and ground truth poses of both indoor
and outdoor scenes.
• 7 Scenes [207] is an RGB-D dataset with ground truth
poses and dense 3D models. The sequences were
recorded for each scene by different users and split
into distinct training and testing sets for localization
evaluation.
Metrics.
Pose metrics Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) and
Relative Pose Error (RPE) are used for localization evaluation.
ATE quantifies the difference between the estimated camera
positions and the ground truth positions. RPE measures the
relative pose errors between pairs of images. In 3DGS-based
localization, rendering metrics PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS are
also employed for evaluating the accuracy of images ren-
dered based on the estimated poses.
Results.
Existing 3DGS-based localization methods em-
ploy various datasets and sequences. Meanwhile, these
methods are not open source, so it is not possible to compare
the performance of existing localization methods under the
same conditions. Generally, existing 3DGS-based localiza-
tion methods can achieve a positional accuracy of 5cm and
an angular accuracy of 2◦.
5.4
Segmentation Evaluation
Datasets.
Datasets with ground truth semantic annota-
tions are used for segmentation evaluation, including LERF-
Mask [58], SPIn-NeRF [208], as well as indoor datasets
Replica [197] and ScanNet [198], which are also used in
SLAM evaluations. Specifically, LERF-Mask [58] is used to
assess text-query semantic segmentation, a crucial task in
robotic manipulation and navigation that requires robots to
identify specific objects in the environment following text
prompts. Detailed descriptions of segmentation datasets are
given below.
• LERF-Mask dataset [58] contains semantic annotations of
three scenes from LERF-Localization dataset [209]. This
dataset contains a total of 23 prompts.
• SPIn-NeRF dataset [208] contains 10 real-world forward-
facing scenes with annotated object masks. Each scene

<!-- page 14 -->
14
TABLE 6: Segmentation performance comparison.
Methods
LERF-Mask
SPIn-NeRF
mIoU↑
mIoU↑
Acc.↑
SAGA [59]
–
88.0
98.5
SAGD [63]
–
89.9
98.7
Gaussian Grouping [58]
72.8
–
–
Feature 3DGS [60]
65.6
–
–
Gaga [66]
74.7
–
–
CGC [67]
80.3
–
–
Click-Gaussian [72]
89.1
94.0
–
includes 60 training images with the object and 40 test
images without the object.
Metrics.
Although existing 3DGS-based semantic segmen-
tation methods can achieve 3D segmentation, their per-
formance is still evaluated by measuring the discrepancy
between the rendered semantics and the 2D ground truth la-
bels. Mean intersection over union (mIoU(%)), mean bound-
ary intersection over union (mBIoU(%)), and pixel accu-
racy (Acc.(%)) are used for semantic evaluation. Specifically,
mIoU measures the overlap of the ground truth and ren-
dered masks. mBIoU quantifies contour alignment between
predicted and ground truth masks.
Results.
Performance comparison on LERF-Mask [58] and
SPIn-NeRF [208] datasets are shown in Table 6.
5.5
Manipulation Evaluation
Datasets.
The performance of manipulation methods
is evaluated on both simulated datasets and real-world
scenes. Simulated datasets include RLBench [210] and
Robomimic [211]. In addition, real-world robotic arm trials
are conducted to measure the grasping accuracy in practical
scenarios. Detailed descriptions of the simulated datasets
are shown below.
• RLBench dataset [210] is a large-scale learning envi-
ronment featuring 100 unique, hand-designed tasks.
These tasks range from simple target reaching and door
opening, to longer multi-stage tasks, such as opening an
oven and placing a tray in it.
• Robomimic
dataset
[211]
consists
of
data
collected
from
three
different
sources,
including
Machine-
Generated (MG), Proficient-Human (PH), and Multi-
Human (MH). MG contains 300 rollout trajectories
from agent checkpoints that are saved regularly during
training of a reinforcement learning (RL) method [212].
PH consists of 200 demonstrations collected from a
single proficient human operator. MH consists of 300
demonstrations collected from six human operators of
varied proficiency.
Metrics.
Success rate (%) metric is used to evaluate the
performance of manipulation, representing the percentage
of successful executions of grasping or placement tasks by a
robot arm over multiple tries.
Results.
In existing 3DGS-based manipulation methods,
grippers are employed to perform operations. Due to varia-
tions in real-world test scenarios and differences in the robot
arms used, it is not feasible to conduct comparisons under
the same conditions. Generally, for single-stage tasks, the
success rate can reach up to 80%, whereas for multi-stage
tasks, the success rate is under 50%.
5.6
Path Planning Evaluation
Datasets.
3DGS-based path planning evaluation uses sim-
ulated dataset Matterport3D [213], Habitat-Matterport 3D
(HM3D) [214] or custom-built simulation environments via
the Unity engine. Detailed descriptions of path planning
datasets are given below.
• Matterport3D [213] is a large-scale RGB-D dataset con-
taining 10,800 panoramic views from 90 building-scale
scenes, with surface reconstructions, camera poses,
2D and 3D semantic segmentation annotations. This
dataset is typically constructed with the Habitat sim-
ulator [215] for evaluating path planning.
• HM3D [214], which is designed for the object goal
navigation task, consists of 142,646 object instance an-
notations across 216 3D spaces and 3,100 rooms within
those spaces.
Metrics.
Planning accuracy metric success rate (%) and
SPL
[216],
planning
safety
metric Wasserstein distance
(W2(P, ˆP)) [217], are used to evaluate path planning per-
formance. Specifically, success rate is the percentage of trials
in which the agent successfully invokes the STOP action
within a predefined Euclidean distance from the goal object.
SPL is success rate weighted by normalized inverse path
length that considers both the success of reaching the goal
and the efficiency (path length) of getting there. W2(P, ˆP)
quantifies the dissimilarity between the robot’s estimated
risk distribution ˆP and the true risk distribution P, which
indicates the accuracy of the robot’s risk assessment of the
environment that represents the safety of robots.
Results.
Existing 3DGS-based path planning methods are
designed for various tasks, such as Instance ImageGoal Nav-
igation (IIN) and safe navigation. Therefore, these 3DGS-
based methods can only be compared with corresponding
traditional navigation methods under the same conditions.
Typically, for IIN task, existing methods reach a 72% success
rate of path planning. In save navigation, existing works can
achieve an average of 0.68 in W2(P, ˆP) metric.
6
FUTURE RESEARCH
Although 3DGS has been widely used in robotics tasks,
there are still many challenges that remain unsolved in such
tasks. In this section, we present some valuable research
directions as references for future research.
6.1
Robust Tracking
Existing 3DGS-based SLAM methods, although demon-
strating high accuracy in dense mapping, typically fail to
achieve accurate and robust tracking, especially in complex
real-world scenarios. This limitation in current 3DGS-based
SLAM systems is due to their reliance on directly using RGB
information of image for pose optimization. Such reliance
heavily depends on the quality and texture information of
the images. However, in real-world robotic applications,
image quality is prone to camera motion blur, degrading
the performance of 3DGS-based SLAM. Moreover, there are
some scenes with limited texture information, such as sky or
walls, leading to insufficient constraints for pose estimation.
The following presents corresponding directions to improve
the robustness of tracking.

<!-- page 15 -->
15
Camera motion blur.
Camera motion blur is primarily
caused by rapid movements of the robot and slow shutter
speed of the camera, leading to blurry images. Although
deblurring methods have been researched (Section 4.1.1)
and used in SLAM [116], these methods fail to directly con-
vert captured blurry images into sharp ones. Instead, they
simulate motion blur by averaging virtual sharp images
captured during the camera exposure time to synthesize
blurry images. These synthesized blurry images are then
used to construct loss with the observed blurry images
for Gaussian optimization, ensuring that the constructed
scene is deblurred. However, such methods fail to address
the degradation of image quality in the observed images
caused by motion blur, which adversely affects tracking
performance that relies on high-quality images for pose
optimization. A suitable research direction is to leverage
the advantages of 3DGS representation, such as geometric
information and spatial distribution, to perform tracking.
This method can reduce the reliance on image quality.
Limited texture information.
In real-world scenes, there
are some corner cases where the environmental texture
information is limited, leading to insufficient constraints for
pose optimization that solely relies on image quality. Al-
though some 3DGS-based SLAM methods [128], [129] have
utilized multi-sensor fusion traditional SLAM as odometry
for tracking, these methods fail when traditional SLAM is
unable to handle complex corner cases. A potential research
direction is to incorporate original sensor data of multiple
sensors, such as IMU, wheel encoders, and LiDAR, with
3D Gaussian representation to provide sufficient constraints
for pose optimization. This approach not only leverages
the spatial structural information and dense scene repre-
sentation offered by 3DGS, but also exploits the various
constraints from multi-sensor information.
6.2
Lifelong Mapping and Localization
Current 3DGS methods primarily focus on short-term re-
construction and localization. However, in most real-world
scenarios, the environment undergoes constant changes
over time. A prebuilt map that fails to consider these
changes may quickly become outdated and unreliable. Con-
sequently, it is crucial to maintain an up-to-date model of
the environment to facilitate the long-term operation or nav-
igation of robots. Although some traditional methods [218],
[219] have achieved long-term mapping, these approaches
focus on constructing and updating sparse maps, which
are insufficient for downstream robotic tasks. Therefore, a
promising research direction is lifelong 3DGS-based dense
mapping and localization. Since 3DGS is an explicit and
dense representation, the dynamic update and refinement
of the Gaussian map can be achieved through explicit edit-
ing of Gaussian primitives. Additionally, we believe that
the inconsistencies in the Gaussian map caused by long-
term dynamic changes can be optimized by leveraging the
inner constraints between Gaussian primitives. Therefore,
by harnessing the explicit representation and inherent con-
straints among Gaussian primitives, lifelong mapping and
localization can be achieved.
6.3
Large-scale Relocalization
In robotic applications, it is necessary for robots to relocate
their current poses upon entering a pre-established map.
However, existing 3DGS-based relocalization methods [145],
[146] either require a coarse initial pose or are only capable
of achieving relocalization in small indoor scenes. These
methods struggle to perform relocalization in large-scale
outdoor scenes without an initial pose. Unfortunately, it is
challenging to obtain a coarse initial pose for relocalization
in practical robotic applications. Therefore, a meaningful
research direction is large-scale relocalization without prior
poses. We believe that constructing a submap index li-
brary or descriptor based on 3DGS representation facilitates
coarse pose regression. In addition, the coarse pose can
be refined through a registration process that leverages
geometric and appearance features within the 3DGS rep-
resentation.
6.4
Sim-to-Real Manipulation
Collecting real-world manipulation datasets is challenging,
leading to a scarcity of data for training effective grasping
in real scenarios. Therefore, grasping methods often require
initial training in simulation environments before being
transferred to real-world settings. Although 3DGS-based
sim-to-real method [220] has been explored, it has limi-
tation in generalization. Specifically, this approach heavily
depends on scene-specific training, which hinders its ability
to generalize and transfer learned knowledge between simi-
lar task scenarios. Consequently, this method still requires
a substantial amount of real-world datasets for training.
Furthermore, the discrepancies in material and physical
properties between simulation and reality environments can
lead to significant differences in training data distributions
for manipulation tasks. These discrepancies may potentially
result in entirely different operation strategies. However,
existing method [221] only enables modeling the physical
properties of real-world scenarios. Therefore, a promising
research direction involves directly incorporating uncer-
tainty and environmental features into the 3DGS represen-
tation to enhance generalization and property modeling.
7
CONCLUSION
As a powerful radiance field for dense scene representation,
3DGS provides new options in the field of robotics for scene
understanding and interaction. Specifically, 3DGS offers a
dependable selection for many applications in robotics, such
as reconstruction, scene segmentation, scene editing, SLAM,
manipulation, and navigation. Moreover, the capability of
3DGS to enhance its performance in large-scale environ-
ments, motion-blurred conditions, few-shot scenarios, etc.,
remains mostly unexploited. Exploring these areas could
significantly deepen the integration between 3DGS and
robotics. In addition, we conduct a thorough performance
evaluation of current 3DGS applications in robotics, helping
readers choose their preferred approach. Finally, we discuss
in detail the challenges and future development directions
of 3DGS in robotics. Therefore, as our survey provides a
comprehensive summary of the field’s outstanding work

<!-- page 16 -->
16
and emphasizes its potential, we hope this survey encour-
ages more researchers to explore new possibilities and suc-
cessfully implement them on real robotic platforms.
REFERENCES
[1]
B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ra-
mamoorthi, and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural
radiance fields for view synthesis,” in ECCV, 2020.
[2]
B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d
gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM
Trans. Graph., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2023.
[3]
L. A. Westover, Splatting: a parallel, feed-forward volume rendering
algorithm. The University of North Carolina at Chapel Hill, 1991.
[4]
G. Chen and W. Wang, “A survey on 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.03890, 2024.
[5]
B. Fei, J. Xu, R. Zhang, Q. Zhou, W. Yang, and Y. He, “3d gaussian
as a new vision era: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.07181,
2024.
[6]
A. Dalal, D. Hagen, K. G. Robbersmyr, and K. M. Knausg˚ard,
“Gaussian splatting: 3d reconstruction and novel view synthesis,
a review,” IEEE Access, vol. 12, pp. 96 797–96 820, 2024.
[7]
T. Wu, Y.-J. Yuan, L.-X. Zhang, J. Yang, Y.-P. Cao, L.-Q. Yan, and
L. Gao, “Recent advances in 3d gaussian splatting,” Comp. Visual
Media, pp. 1–30, 2024.
[8]
M. T. Bagdasarian, P. Knoll, F. Barthel, A. Hilsmann, P. Eisert, and
W. Morgenstern, “3dgs. zip: A survey on 3d gaussian splatting
compression methods,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.09510, 2024.
[9]
Y. Bao, T. Ding, J. Huo, Y. Liu, Y. Li, W. Li, Y. Gao, and J. Luo,
“3d gaussian splatting: Survey, technologies, challenges, and
opportunities,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.17418, 2024.
[10]
B. Cabral, N. Max, and R. Springmeyer, “Bidirectional reflection
functions from surface bump maps,” in Proc. of the 14th annual
conf. on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, 1987, pp. 273–
281.
[11]
J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revis-
ited,” in CVPR, 2016, pp. 4104–4113.
[12]
J. Bai, L. Huang, J. Guo, W. Gong, Y. Li, and Y. Guo, “360-gs:
Layout-guided panoramic gaussian splatting for indoor roam-
ing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.00763, 2024.
[13]
H. Xiang, X. Li, X. Lai, W. Zhang, Z. Liao, K. Cheng, and
X. Liu, “Gaussianroom: Improving 3d gaussian splatting with sdf
guidance and monocular cues for indoor scene reconstruction,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19671, 2024.
[14]
J. Kim and J. Lim, “Integrating meshes and 3d gaussians for
indoor scene reconstruction with sam mask guidance,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.16173, 2024.
[15]
K. Cheng, X. Long, K. Yang, Y. Yao, W. Yin, Y. Ma, W. Wang, and
X. Chen, “Gaussianpro: 3d gaussian splatting with progressive
propagation,” in Forty-first Int. conf. on Machine Learning, 2024.
[16]
H. Dahmani, M. Bennehar, N. Piasco, L. Roldao, and D. Tsishkou,
“Swag:
Splatting
in
the
wild
images
with
appearance-
conditioned gaussians,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10427, 2024.
[17]
C. Ye, Y. Nie, J. Chang, Y. Chen, Y. Zhi, and X. Han, “Gaustudio:
A modular framework for 3d gaussian splatting and beyond,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19632, 2024.
[18]
K. Wu, K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, S. Yuan, M. Tie, J. Wei, Z. Xu, J. Zhao,
Z. Gan, and W. Ding, “Hgs-mapping: Online dense mapping
using hybrid gaussian representation in urban scenes,” RA-L,
vol. 9, no. 11, pp. 9573–9580, 2024.
[19]
Z. Li, Y. Zhang, C. Wu, J. Zhu, and L. Zhang, “Ho-gaussian:
Hybrid optimization of 3d gaussian splatting for urban scenes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20032, 2024.
[20]
C. Zhao, S. Sun, R. Wang, Y. Guo, J.-J. Wan, Z. Huang, X. Huang,
Y. V. Chen, and L. Ren, “Tclc-gs: Tightly coupled lidar-camera
gaussian splatting for surrounding autonomous driving scenes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.02410, 2024.
[21]
D. Chen, H. Li, W. Ye, Y. Wang, W. Xie, S. Zhai, N. Wang, H. Liu,
H. Bao, and G. Zhang, “Pgsr: Planar-based gaussian splatting for
efficient and high-fidelity surface reconstruction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.06521, 2024.
[22]
J. Xu, Y. Mei, and V. M. Patel, “Wild-gs: Real-time novel view
synthesis from unconstrained photo collections,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.10373, 2024.
[23]
J. Kulhanek, S. Peng, Z. Kukelova, M. Pollefeys, and T. Sattler,
“Wildgaussians: 3d gaussian splatting in the wild,” NeurIPS,
2024.
[24]
X. Shi, L. Chen, P. Wei, X. Wu, T. Jiang, Y. Luo, and L. Xie, “Dhgs:
Decoupled hybrid gaussian splatting for driving scene,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2407.16600, 2024.
[25]
B. Huang, Z. Yu, A. Chen, A. Geiger, and S. Gao, “2d gaussian
splatting for geometrically accurate radiance fields,” in ACM
SIGGRAPH 2024 Conf., 2024, pp. 1–11.
[26]
Y. Chen, C. Gu, J. Jiang, X. Zhu, and L. Zhang, “Periodic vibration
gaussian: Dynamic urban scene reconstruction and real-time
rendering,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18561, 2023.
[27]
X. Zhou, Z. Lin, X. Shan, Y. Wang, D. Sun, and M.-H. Yang,
“Drivinggaussian: Composite gaussian splatting for surrounding
dynamic autonomous driving scenes,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 21 634–
21 643.
[28]
Y. Yan, H. Lin, C. Zhou, W. Wang, H. Sun, K. Zhan, X. Lang,
X. Zhou, and S. Peng, “Street gaussians for modeling dynamic
urban scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01339, 2024.
[29]
H. Zhou, J. Shao, L. Xu, D. Bai, W. Qiu, B. Liu, Y. Wang, A. Geiger,
and Y. Liao, “Hugs: Holistic urban 3d scene understanding via
gaussian splatting,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 21 336–21 345.
[30]
J. Lei, Y. Weng, A. Harley, L. Guibas, and K. Daniilidis, “Mosca:
Dynamic gaussian fusion from casual videos via 4d motion
scaffolds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17421, 2024.
[31]
N. Huang, X. Wei, W. Zheng, P. An, M. Lu, W. Zhan,
M. Tomizuka, K. Keutzer, and S. Zhang, “S3 gaussian: Self-
supervised street gaussians for autonomous driving,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.20323, 2024.
[32]
T. Fischer, J. Kulhanek, S. R. Bul`o, L. Porzi, M. Pollefeys, and
P. Kontschieder, “Dynamic 3d gaussian fields for urban areas,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.03175, 2024.
[33]
H. Li, J. Li, D. Zhang, C. Wu, J. Shi, C. Zhao, H. Feng, E. Ding,
J. Wang, and J. Han, “Vdg: Vision-only dynamic gaussian for
driving simulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.18198, 2024.
[34]
D. Zhang, G. Li, J. Li, M. Bressieux, O. Hilliges, M. Pollefeys,
L. Van Gool, and X. Wang, “Egogaussian: Dynamic scene un-
derstanding from egocentric video with 3d gaussian splatting,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.19811, 2024.
[35]
M. Khan, H. Fazlali, D. Sharma, T. Cao, D. Bai, Y. Ren, and B. Liu,
“Autosplat: Constrained gaussian splatting for autonomous driv-
ing scene reconstruction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02598, 2024.
[36]
J. Luiten, G. Kopanas, B. Leibe, and D. Ramanan, “Dynamic 3d
gaussians: Tracking by persistent dynamic view synthesis,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2308.09713, 2023.
[37]
Z. Yang, X. Gao, W. Zhou, S. Jiao, Y. Zhang, and X. Jin, “De-
formable 3d gaussians for high-fidelity monocular dynamic scene
reconstruction,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 20 331–20 341.
[38]
G. Wu, T. Yi, J. Fang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Wei, W. Liu, Q. Tian,
and X. Wang, “4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene
rendering,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 20 310–20 320.
[39]
Z. Yang, H. Yang, Z. Pan, X. Zhu, and L. Zhang, “Real-time
photorealistic dynamic scene representation and rendering with
4d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10642, 2023.
[40]
K. Katsumata, D. M. Vo, and H. Nakayama, “An efficient 3d gaus-
sian representation for monocular/multi-view dynamic scenes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.12897, 2023.
[41]
Y.-H. Huang, Y.-T. Sun, Z. Yang, X. Lyu, Y.-P. Cao, and X. Qi,
“Sc-gs: Sparse-controlled gaussian splatting for editable dynamic
scenes,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 4220–4230.
[42]
Y. Lin, Z. Dai, S. Zhu, and Y. Yao, “Gaussian-flow: 4d recon-
struction with dynamic 3d gaussian particle,” in CVPR, 2024, pp.
21 136–21 145.
[43]
Y. Liang, N. Khan, Z. Li, T. Nguyen-Phuoc, D. Lanman,
J. Tompkin, and L. Xiao, “Gaufre: Gaussian deformation fields
for real-time dynamic novel view synthesis,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.11458, 2023.
[44]
R. Shaw, J. Song, A. Moreau, M. Nazarczuk, S. Catley-Chandar,
H. Dhamo, and E. Perez-Pellitero, “Swags: Sampling windows
adaptively for dynamic 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.13308, 2023.
[45]
Z. Li, Z. Chen, Z. Li, and Y. Xu, “Spacetime gaussian feature
splatting for real-time dynamic view synthesis,” in CVPR, 2024,
pp. 8508–8520.
[46]
Y. Duan, F. Wei, Q. Dai, Y. He, W. Chen, and B. Chen, “4d gaussian
splatting: Towards efficient novel view synthesis for dynamic
scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03307, 2024.
[47]
J. Sun, H. Jiao, G. Li, Z. Zhang, L. Zhao, and W. Xing, “3dgstream:
On-the-fly training of 3d gaussians for efficient streaming of

<!-- page 17 -->
17
photo-realistic free-viewpoint videos,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 20 675–
20 685.
[48]
J. Bae, S. Kim, Y. Yun, H. Lee, G. Bang, and Y. Uh, “Per-gaussian
embedding-based deformation for deformable 3d gaussian splat-
ting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.03613, 2024.
[49]
Z. Lu, X. Guo, L. Hui, T. Chen, M. Yang, X. Tang, F. Zhu, and
Y. Dai, “3d geometry-aware deformable gaussian splatting for
dynamic view synthesis,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 8900–8910.
[50]
B. Zhang, B. Zeng, and Z. Peng, “A refined 3d gaussian repre-
sentation for high-quality dynamic scene reconstruction,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.17891, 2024.
[51]
D. Wan, R. Lu, and G. Zeng, “Superpoint gaussian splatting
for real-time high-fidelity dynamic scene reconstruction,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2406.03697, 2024.
[52]
M.-L. Shih, J.-B. Huang, C. Kim, R. Shah, J. Kopf, and C. Gao,
“Modeling ambient scene dynamics for free-view synthesis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09395, 2024.
[53]
C. Stearns, A. Harley, M. Uy, F. Dubost, F. Tombari, G. Wet-
zstein, and L. Guibas, “Dynamic gaussian marbles for novel
view synthesis of casual monocular videos,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.18717, 2024.
[54]
L. Xie, J. Julin, K. Niinuma, and L. A. Jeni, “Gaussian splatting
lk,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.11309, 2024.
[55]
B. He, Y. Chen, G. Lu, L. Song, and W. Zhang, “S4d: Streaming 4d
real-world reconstruction with gaussians and 3d control points,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.13036, 2024.
[56]
A. Cao and J. Johnson, “Hexplane: A fast representation for
dynamic scenes,” in CVPR, 2023, pp. 130–141.
[57]
M. T. Bosch, “N-dimensional rigid body dynamics,” ACM Trans.
Graph., vol. 39, no. 4, pp. 55–1, 2020.
[58]
M. Ye, M. Danelljan, F. Yu, and L. Ke, “Gaussian group-
ing: Segment and edit anything in 3d scenes,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00732, 2023.
[59]
J. Cen, J. Fang, C. Yang, L. Xie, X. Zhang, W. Shen, and Q. Tian,
“Segment any 3d gaussians,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00860,
2023.
[60]
S. Zhou, H. Chang, S. Jiang, Z. Fan, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, P. Chari,
S. You, Z. Wang, and A. Kadambi, “Feature 3dgs: Supercharging
3d gaussian splatting to enable distilled feature fields,” in CVPR,
2024, pp. 21 676–21 685.
[61]
K. Lan, H. Li, H. Shi, W. Wu, Y. Liao, L. Wang, and
P. Zhou, “2d-guided 3d gaussian segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.16047, 2023.
[62]
B. Dou, T. Zhang, Y. Ma, Z. Wang, and Z. Yuan, “Cosseggaus-
sians: Compact and swift scene segmenting 3d gaussians,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.05925, 2024.
[63]
X. Hu, Y. Wang, L. Fan, J. Fan, J. Peng, Z. Lei, Q. Li, and
Z. Zhang, “Semantic anything in 3d gaussians,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.17857, 2024.
[64]
J. Guo, X. Ma, Y. Fan, H. Liu, and Q. Li, “Semantic gaussians:
Open-vocabulary scene understanding with 3d gaussian splat-
ting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.15624, 2024.
[65]
Q. Gu, Z. Lv, D. Frost, S. Green, J. Straub, and C. Sweeney, “Ego-
lifter: Open-world 3d segmentation for egocentric perception,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.18118, 2024.
[66]
W. Lyu, X. Li, A. Kundu, Y.-H. Tsai, and M.-H. Yang, “Gaga:
Group any gaussians via 3d-aware memory bank,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.07977, 2024.
[67]
M. C. Silva, M. Dahaghin, M. Toso, and A. Del Bue, “Contrastive
gaussian clustering: Weakly supervised 3d scene segmentation,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.12784, 2024.
[68]
G. Liao, J. Li, Z. Bao, X. Ye, J. Wang, Q. Li, and K. Liu,
“Clip-gs: Clip-informed gaussian splatting for real-time and
view-consistent 3d semantic understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14249, 2024.
[69]
X. Zuo, P. Samangouei, Y. Zhou, Y. Di, and M. Li, “Fmgs:
Foundation model embedded 3d gaussian splatting for holistic
3d scene understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01970, 2024.
[70]
M.-B. Jurca, R. Royen, I. Giosan, and A. Munteanu, “Rt-gs2: Real-
time generalizable semantic segmentation for 3d gaussian rep-
resentations of radiance fields,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.18033,
2024.
[71]
Y. Wu, J. Meng, H. Li, C. Wu, Y. Shi, X. Cheng, C. Zhao, H. Feng,
E. Ding, J. Wang et al., “Opengaussian: Towards point-level 3d
gaussian-based open vocabulary understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.02058, 2024.
[72]
S. Choi, H. Song, J. Kim, T. Kim, and H. Do, “Click-gaussian:
Interactive segmentation to any 3d gaussians,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.11793, 2024.
[73]
S. Ji, G. Wu, J. Fang, J. Cen, T. Yi, W. Liu, Q. Tian, and X. Wang,
“Segment any 4d gaussians,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.04504,
2024.
[74]
F. Chabot, N. Granger, and G. Lapouge, “Gaussianbev: 3d gaus-
sian representation meets perception models for bev segmenta-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.14108, 2024.
[75]
A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo et al., “Segment
anything,” in ICCV, 2023, pp. 4015–4026.
[76]
H. K. Cheng, S. W. Oh, B. Price, A. Schwing, and J.-Y. Lee,
“Tracking anything with decoupled video segmentation,” in
ICCV, 2023, pp. 1316–1326.
[77]
A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agar-
wal, G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark et al., “Learning
transferable visual models from natural language supervision,”
in Int. conf. on machine learning.
PMLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[78]
M. Caron, H. Touvron, I. Misra, H. J´egou, J. Mairal, P. Bojanowski,
and A. Joulin, “Emerging properties in self-supervised vision
transformers,” in ICCV, 2021, pp. 9650–9660.
[79]
Y. Wang, Q. Wu, G. Zhang, and D. Xu, “Gscream: Learning 3d
geometry and feature consistent gaussian splatting for object
removal,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13679, 2024.
[80]
Y. Mei, J. Xu, and V. M. Patel, “Reference-based control-
lable scene stylization with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.07220, 2024.
[81]
J. Huang and H. Yu, “Point’n move: Interactive scene object ma-
nipulation on gaussian splatting radiance fields,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.16737, 2023.
[82]
G. Luo, T.-X. Xu, Y.-T. Liu, X.-X. Fan, F.-L. Zhang, and S.-H.
Zhang, “3d gaussian editing with a single image,” ACM Mul-
timedia, 2024.
[83]
R.-Z. Qiu, G. Yang, W. Zeng, and X. Wang, “Feature splatting:
Language-driven physics-based scene synthesis and editing,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01223, 2024.
[84]
T.-X. Xu, W. Hu, Y.-K. Lai, Y. Shan, and S.-H. Zhang, “Texture-gs:
Disentangling the geometry and texture for 3d gaussian splatting
editing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10050, 2024.
[85]
J. Zhuang, D. Kang, Y.-P. Cao, G. Li, L. Lin, and Y. Shan, “Tip-
editor: An accurate 3d editor following both text-prompts and
image-prompts,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 43, no. 4, pp. 1–12, 2024.
[86]
F. Palandra, A. Sanchietti, D. Baieri, and E. Rodol`a, “Gsedit:
Efficient text-guided editing of 3d objects via gaussian splatting,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.05154, 2024.
[87]
J. Wu, J.-W. Bian, X. Li, G. Wang, I. Reid, P. Torr, and V. A.
Prisacariu, “Gaussctrl: multi-view consistent text-driven 3d gaus-
sian splatting editing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08733, 2024.
[88]
Y. Wang, X. Yi, Z. Wu, N. Zhao, L. Chen, and H. Zhang, “View-
consistent 3d editing with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.11868, 2024.
[89]
J. Wang, J. Fang, X. Zhang, L. Xie, and Q. Tian, “Gaussianeditor:
Editing 3d gaussians delicately with text instructions,” in CVPR,
2024, pp. 20 902–20 911.
[90]
Y. Chen, Z. Chen, C. Zhang, F. Wang, X. Yang, Y. Wang, Z. Cai,
L. Yang, H. Liu, and G. Lin, “Gaussianeditor: Swift and con-
trollable 3d editing with gaussian splatting,” in CVPR, 2024, pp.
21 476–21 485.
[91]
M. Chen, I. Laina, and A. Vedaldi, “Dge: Direct gaussian 3d
editing by consistent multi-view editing,” 2024.
[92]
T. Xu, J. Chen, P. Chen, Y. Zhang, J. Yu, and W. Yang, “Tiger:
Text-instructed 3d gaussian retrieval and coherent editing,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.14455, 2024.
[93]
C. Luo, D. Di, Y. Ma, Z. Xue, C. Wei, X. Yang, and Y. Liu, “Trame:
Trajectory-anchored multi-view editing for text-guided 3d gaus-
sian splatting manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.02034,
2024.
[94]
U. Khalid, H. Iqbal, A. Farooq, J. Hua, and C. Chen, “3dego: 3d
editing on the go!” in ECCV, 2024.
[95]
H. Xiao, Y. Chen, H. Huang, H. Xiong, J. Yang, P. Prasad, and
Y. Zhao, “Localized gaussian splatting editing with contextual
awareness,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00083, 2024.
[96]
R. Rombach, A. Blattmann, D. Lorenz, P. Esser, and B. Ommer,
“High-resolution image synthesis with latent diffusion models,”
in CVPR, 2022, pp. 10 684–10 695.

<!-- page 18 -->
18
[97]
L. Zhang, A. Rao, and M. Agrawala, “Adding conditional control
to text-to-image diffusion models,” in ICCV, 2023, pp. 3836–3847.
[98]
K. Liu, F. Zhan, M. Xu, C. Theobalt, L. Shao, and S. Lu, “Style-
gaussian: Instant 3d style transfer with gaussian splatting,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.07807, 2024.
[99]
D. Zhang, Z. Chen, Y.-J. Yuan, F.-L. Zhang, Z. He, S. Shan,
and L. Gao, “Stylizedgs: Controllable stylization for 3d gaussian
splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.05220, 2024.
[100] A. Saroha, M. Gladkova, C. Curreli, T. Yenamandra, and
D.
Cremers,
“Gaussian
splatting
in
style,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2403.08498, 2024.
[101] V. Jaganathan, H. H. Huang, M. Z. Irshad, V. Jampani, A. Raj, and
Z. Kira, “Ice-g: Image conditional editing of 3d gaussian splats,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.08488, 2024.
[102] S. Jain, A. Kuthiala, P. S. Sethi, and P. Saxena, “Stylesplat:
3d object style transfer with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.09473, 2024.
[103] X.-Y. Yu, J.-X. Yu, L.-B. Zhou, Y. Wei, and L.-L. Ou, “Instantstyle-
gaussian: Efficient art style transfer with 3d gaussian splatting,”
SIGGRAPH Asia, 2024.
[104] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, “Splatam: Splat track & map 3d
gaussians for dense rgb-d slam,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 21 357–
21 366.
[105] V. Yugay, Y. Li, T. Gevers, and M. R. Oswald, “Gaussian-slam:
Photo-realistic dense slam with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10070, 2023.
[106] M. Li, J. Huang, L. Sun, A. X. Tian, T. Deng, and H. Wang, “Ngm-
slam: Gaussian splatting slam with radiance field submap,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2405.05702, 2024.
[107] S. Liu, H. Zhou, L. Li, Y. Liu, T. Deng, Y. Zhou, and M. Li,
“Structure gaussian slam with manhattan world hypothesis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20031, 2024.
[108] S. Sun, M. Mielle, A. J. Lilienthal, and M. Magnusson, “High-
fidelity slam using gaussian splatting with rendering-guided
densification and regularized optimization,” in IROS, 2024.
[109] J. Hu, X. Chen, B. Feng, G. Li, L. Yang, H. Bao, G. Zhang,
and Z. Cui, “Cg-slam: Efficient dense rgb-d slam in a consistent
uncertainty-aware 3d gaussian field,” in ECCV, 2024.
[110] C. Yan, D. Qu, D. Xu, B. Zhao, Z. Wang, D. Wang, and X. Li, “Gs-
slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaussian splatting,” in CVPR,
2024, pp. 19 595–19 604.
[111] S. Ha, J. Yeon, and H. Yu, “Rgbd gs-icp slam,” in ECCV, 2024.
[112] P. Jiang, H. Liu, X. Li, T. Wang, F. Zhang, and J. M. Buhmann,
“Tambridge: Bridging frame-centered tracking and 3d gaussian
splatting for enhanced slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.19614,
2024.
[113] T. Deng, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Yang, S. Yuan, D. Wang, and
W. Chen, “Compact 3d gaussian splatting for dense visual slam,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11247, 2024.
[114] Z. Peng, T. Shao, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, Y. Yang, J. Wang, and K. Zhou,
“Rtg-slam: Real-time 3d reconstruction at scale using gaussian
splatting,” in SIGGRAPH, 2024.
[115] Z. Qu, Z. Zhang, C. Liu, and J. Yin, “Visual slam with 3d gaussian
primitives and depth priors enabling novel view synthesis,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.05635, 2024.
[116] G. Bae, C. Choi, H. Heo, S. M. Kim, and Y. M. Kim, “I2-slam:
Inverting imaging process for robust photorealistic dense slam,”
in ECCV, 2024.
[117] L. Zhu, Y. Li, E. Sandstr¨om, K. Schindler, and I. Armeni, “Loop-
splat: Loop closure by registering 3d gaussian splats,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.10154, 2024.
[118] J. Wei and S. Leutenegger, “Gsfusion: Online rgb-d mapping
where gaussian splatting meets tsdf fusion,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.12677, 2024.
[119] A. Segal, D. Haehnel, and S. Thrun, “Generalized-icp.” in
Robotics: science and systems, vol. 2, no. 4.
Seattle, WA, 2009,
p. 435.
[120] H. Matsuki, R. Murai, P. H. Kelly, and A. J. Davison, “Gaussian
splatting slam,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 18 039–18 048.
[121] X. Guo, P. Han, W. Zhang, and H. Chen, “Motiongs: Com-
pact gaussian splatting slam by motion filter,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.11129, 2024.
[122] H. Huang, L. Li, H. Cheng, and S.-K. Yeung, “Photo-slam: Real-
time simultaneous localization and photorealistic mapping for
monocular stereo and rgb-d cameras,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 21 584–
21 593.
[123] P. Zhu, Y. Zhuang, B. Chen, L. Li, C. Wu, and Z. Liu, “Mgs-slam:
Monocular sparse tracking and gaussian mapping with depth
smooth regularization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.06241, 2024.
[124] T. Lan, Q. Lin, and H. Wang, “Monocular gaussian slam with
language extended loop closure,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13748,
2024.
[125] E. Sandstr¨om, K. Tateno, M. Oechsle, M. Niemeyer, L. Van Gool,
M. R. Oswald, and F. Tombari, “Splat-slam: Globally op-
timized
rgb-only
slam
with
3d
gaussians,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2405.16544, 2024.
[126] F. A. Sarikamis and A. A. Alatan, “Ig-slam: Instant gaussian
slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.01126, 2024.
[127] Z. Teed, L. Lipson, and J. Deng, “Deep patch visual odometry,”
NeurIPS, vol. 36, 2024.
[128] S. Hong, J. He, X. Zheng, C. Zheng, and S. Shen, “Liv-gaussmap:
Lidar-inertial-visual fusion for real-time 3d radiance field map
rendering,” RA-L, 2024.
[129] X. Lang, L. Li, H. Zhang, F. Xiong, M. Xu, Y. Liu, X. Zuo, and J. Lv,
“Gaussian-lic: Photo-realistic lidar-inertial-camera slam with 3d
gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.06926, 2024.
[130] C. Wu, Y. Duan, X. Zhang, Y. Sheng, J. Ji, and Y. Zhang, “Mm-
gaussian: 3d gaussian-based multi-modal fusion for localization
and reconstruction in unbounded scenes,” in IROS, 2024.
[131] I. Vizzo, T. Guadagnino, B. Mersch, L. Wiesmann, J. Behley, and
C. Stachniss, “Kiss-icp: In defense of point-to-point icp–simple,
accurate, and robust registration if done the right way,” RA-L,
vol. 8, no. 2, pp. 1029–1036, 2023.
[132] L. C. Sun, N. P. Bhatt, J. C. Liu, Z. Fan, Z. Wang, T. E. Humphreys,
and U. Topcu, “Mm3dgs slam: Multi-modal 3d gaussian splatting
for slam using vision, depth, and inertial measurements,” in
IROS, 2024.
[133] M. Li, S. Liu, and H. Zhou, “Sgs-slam: Semantic gaussian splat-
ting for neural dense slam,” in ECCV, 2024.
[134] S. Zhu, R. Qin, G. Wang, J. Liu, and H. Wang, “Semgauss-
slam: Dense semantic gaussian splatting slam,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.07494, 2024.
[135] Y. Ji, Y. Liu, G. Xie, B. Ma, and Z. Xie, “Neds-slam: A novel
neural explicit dense semantic slam framework using 3d gaussian
splatting,” RA-L, vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 8778–8785, 2024.
[136] S. Zhu, G. Wang, H. Blum, J. Liu, L. Song, M. Pollefeys, and
H. Wang, “Sni-slam: Semantic neural implicit slam,” in CVPR,
2024, pp. 21 167–21 177.
[137] L. Li, L. Zhang, Z. Wang, and Y. Shen, “Gs3lam: Gaussian
semantic splatting slam,” in ACM Multimedia 2024.
[138] J. Yu, K. Hari, K. Srinivas, K. El-Refai, A. Rashid, C. M. Kim,
J. Kerr, R. Cheng, M. Z. Irshad, A. Balakrishna, T. Kollar, and
K. Goldberg, “Language-embedded gaussian splats (legs): In-
crementally building room-scale representations with a mobile
robot,” in Proceedings of the IEEE International Conference on Intel-
ligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 2024.
[139] Y. Zheng, X. Chen, Y. Zheng, S. Gu, R. Yang, B. Jin, P. Li, C. Zhong,
Z. Wang, L. Liu et al., “Gaussiangrasper: 3d language gaussian
splatting for open-vocabulary robotic grasping,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.09637, 2024.
[140] O. Shorinwa, J. Tucker, A. Smith, A. Swann, T. Chen, R. Firoozi,
M. Kennedy III, and M. Schwager, “Splat-mover: Multi-stage,
open-vocabulary robotic manipulation via editable gaussian
splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.04378, 2024.
[141] G. Lu, S. Zhang, Z. Wang, C. Liu, J. Lu, and Y. Tang, “Manigaus-
sian: Dynamic gaussian splatting for multi-task robotic manipu-
lation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08321, 2024.
[142] Y. Li and D. Pathak, “Object-aware gaussian splatting for robotic
manipulation,” in ICRA 2024 Workshop on 3D Visual Representa-
tions for Robot Manipulation.
[143] Y. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, Y. Guo, and
F. Wang, “icomma: Inverting 3d gaussians splatting for camera
pose estimation via comparing and matching,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.09031, 2023.
[144] K. Jiang, Y. Fu, M. Varma T, Y. Belhe, X. Wang, H. Su, and
R. Ramamoorthi, “A construct-optimize approach to sparse view
synthesis without camera pose,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Con-
ference Papers, 2024, pp. 1–11.
[145] P. Jiang, G. Pandey, and S. Saripalli, “3dgs-reloc: 3d gaussian
splatting for map representation and visual relocalization,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.11367, 2024.
[146] J.-M. Liu, H.-K. Yang, T.-C. Chiang, T.-R. Liu, C.-W. Huang,
Q. Kong, N. Kobori, and C.-Y. Lee, “Enhancing visual relocal-

<!-- page 19 -->
19
ization with dense scene coordinates derived from 3d gaussian
splatting,” in RoboNerF: 1st Workshop On Neural Fields In Robotics
at ICRA 2024.
[147] M. Bortolon, T. Tsesmelis, S. James, F. Poiesi, and A. Del Bue,
“6dgs: 6d pose estimation from a single image and a 3d gaussian
splatting model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.15484, 2024.
[148] Y.
Fu,
S.
Liu,
A.
Kulkarni,
J.
Kautz,
A.
A.
Efros,
and
X. Wang, “Colmap-free 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.07504, 2023.
[149] H. Li, Y. Gao, D. Zhang, C. Wu, Y. Dai, C. Zhao, H. Feng, E. Ding,
J. Wang, and J. Han, “Ggrt: Towards generalizable 3d gaussians
without pose priors in real-time,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.10147,
2024.
[150] J. Chang, Y. Xu, Y. Li, Y. Chen, and X. Han, “Gaussreg: Fast 3d reg-
istration with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.05254,
2024.
[151] C. Liu, S. Chen, Y. Bhalgat, S. Hu, Z. Wang, M. Cheng, V. A.
Prisacariu, and T. Braud, “Gsloc: Efficient camera pose refine-
ment via 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.11085,
2024.
[152] R. Jin, Y. Gao, H. Lu, and F. Gao, “Gs-planner: A gaussian-
splatting-based planning framework for active high-fidelity re-
construction,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.10142, 2024.
[153] X. Lei, M. Wang, W. Zhou, and H. Li, “Gaussnav: Gaussian
splatting for visual navigation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11625,
2024.
[154] T. Chen, O. Shorinwa, W. Zeng, J. Bruno, P. Dames, and
M. Schwager, “Splat-nav: Safe real-time robot navigation in gaus-
sian splatting maps,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.02751, 2024.
[155] G. Liu, W. Jiang, B. Lei, V. Pandey, K. Daniilidis, and N. Motee,
“Beyond uncertainty: Risk-aware active view acquisition for safe
robot navigation and 3d scene understanding with fisherrf,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11396, 2024.
[156] J. Oh, J. Chung, D. Lee, and K. M. Lee, “Deblurgs: Gaussian splat-
ting for camera motion blur,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.11358,
2024.
[157] L. Zhao, P. Wang, and P. Liu, “Bad-gaussians: Bundle adjusted
deblur gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11831, 2024.
[158] W. Chen and L. Liu, “Deblur-gs: 3d gaussian splatting from
camera motion blurred images,” Proc. of the ACM on Computer
Graphics and Interactive Techniques, vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–15, 2024.
[159] F. Darmon, L. Porzi, S. Rota-Bul`o, and P. Kontschieder, “Robust
gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.04211, 2024.
[160] O. Seiskari, J. Ylilammi, V. Kaatrasalo, P. Rantalankila, M. Turku-
lainen, J. Kannala, E. Rahtu, and A. Solin, “Gaussian splatting
on the move: Blur and rolling shutter compensation for natural
camera motion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13327, 2024.
[161] J. Lee, D. Kim, D. Lee, S. Cho, and S. Lee, “Crim-gs: Continuous
rigid motion-aware gaussian splatting from motion blur images,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03923, 2024.
[162] R. T. Chen, Y. Rubanova, J. Bettencourt, and D. K. Duvenaud,
“Neural ordinary differential equations,” NeurIPS, vol. 31, 2018.
[163] C. Peng, Y. Tang, Y. Zhou, N. Wang, X. Liu, D. Li, and R. Chel-
lappa, “Bags: Blur agnostic gaussian splatting through multi-
scale kernel modeling,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.04926, 2024.
[164] Y. Chen and G. H. Lee, “Dogaussian: Distributed-oriented gaus-
sian splatting for large-scale 3d reconstruction via gaussian con-
sensus,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.13943, 2024.
[165] K. Ren, L. Jiang, T. Lu, M. Yu, L. Xu, Z. Ni, and B. Dai, “Octree-
gs: Towards consistent real-time rendering with lod-structured
3d gaussians,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.17898, 2024.
[166] Y. Liu, H. Guan, C. Luo, L. Fan, J. Peng, and Z. Zhang, “City-
gaussian: Real-time high-quality large-scale scene rendering with
gaussians,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.01133, 2024.
[167] B. Kerbl, A. Meuleman, G. Kopanas, M. Wimmer, A. Lanvin, and
G. Drettakis, “A hierarchical 3d gaussian representation for real-
time rendering of very large datasets,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 43,
no. 4, pp. 1–15, 2024.
[168] T. Suzuki, “Fed3dgs: Scalable 3d gaussian splatting with feder-
ated learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11460, 2024.
[169] Z. Wang and D. Xu, “Pygs: Large-scale scene representa-
tion with pyramidal 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.16829, 2024.
[170] J. Lin, Z. Li, X. Tang, J. Liu, S. Liu, J. Liu, Y. Lu, X. Wu, S. Xu,
Y. Yan et al., “Vastgaussian: Vast 3d gaussians for large scene
reconstruction,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 5166–5175.
[171] J. C. Lee, D. Rho, X. Sun, J. H. Ko, and E. Park, “Compact 3d
gaussian representation for radiance field,” in CVPR, 2024, pp.
21 719–21 728.
[172] K. Navaneet, K. P. Meibodi, S. A. Koohpayegani, and H. Pirsi-
avash, “Compact3d: Smaller and faster gaussian splatting with
vector quantization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.18159, 2023.
[173] T. Lu, M. Yu, L. Xu, Y. Xiangli, L. Wang, D. Lin, and B. Dai,
“Scaffold-gs: Structured 3d gaussians for view-adaptive render-
ing,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 20 654–20 664.
[174] X. Sun, J. C. Lee, D. Rho, J. H. Ko, U. Ali, and E. Park, “F-
3dgs: Factorized coordinates and representations for 3d gaussian
splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17083, 2024.
[175] H. Wang, H. Zhu, T. He, R. Feng, J. Deng, J. Bian, and Z. Chen,
“End-to-end rate-distortion optimized 3d gaussian representa-
tion,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01597, 2024.
[176] Z. Fan, K. Wang, K. Wen, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, and Z. Wang, “Light-
gaussian: Unbounded 3d gaussian compression with 15x reduc-
tion and 200+ fps,” NeurIPS, 2023.
[177] M. Niemeyer, F. Manhardt, M.-J. Rakotosaona, M. Oechsle,
D. Duckworth, R. Gosula, K. Tateno, J. Bates, D. Kaeser, and
F. Tombari, “Radsplat: Radiance field-informed gaussian splat-
ting for robust real-time rendering with 900+ fps,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.13806, 2024.
[178] W. Liu, T. Guan, B. Zhu, L. Ju, Z. Song, D. Li, Y. Wang,
and W. Yang, “Efficientgs: Streamlining gaussian splatting for
large-scale high-resolution scene representation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.12777, 2024.
[179] A. Hanson, A. Tu, V. Singla, M. Jayawardhana, M. Zwicker, and
T. Goldstein, “Pup 3d-gs: Principled uncertainty pruning for 3d
gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.10219, 2024.
[180] P. Papantonakis, G. Kopanas, B. Kerbl, A. Lanvin, and G. Dret-
takis, “Reducing the memory footprint of 3d gaussian splatting,”
Proc. of the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques,
vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–17, 2024.
[181] O. Mahmoud and M. Gendrin, “On reducing the number of
gaussians for radiance field real-time rendering,” in 2024 ECTI
DAMT & NCON.
IEEE, 2024, pp. 259–264.
[182] S. Subhajyoti Mallick, R. Goel, B. Kerbl, F. V. Carrasco, M. Stein-
berger, and F. De La Torre, “Taming 3dgs: High-quality radiance
fields with limited resources,” arXiv e-prints, pp. arXiv–2406,
2024.
[183] S. Niedermayr, J. Stumpfegger, and R. Westermann, “Com-
pressed 3d gaussian splatting for accelerated novel view syn-
thesis,” in CVPR, 2024, pp. 10 349–10 358.
[184] Y. Chen, Q. Wu, J. Cai, M. Harandi, and W. Lin, “Hac: Hash-grid
assisted context for 3d gaussian splatting compression,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2403.14530, 2024.
[185] X. Liu, X. Wu, P. Zhang, S. Wang, Z. Li, and S. Kwong, “Compgs:
Efficient 3d scene representation via compressed gaussian splat-
ting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.09458, 2024.
[186] Y. Wang, Z. Li, L. Guo, W. Yang, A. C. Kot, and B. Wen, “Con-
textgs: Compact 3d gaussian splatting with anchor level context
model,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.20721, 2024.
[187] W. Morgenstern, F. Barthel, A. Hilsmann, and P. Eisert, “Compact
3d scene representation via self-organizing gaussian grids,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2312.13299, 2023.
[188] Z. Zhu, Z. Fan, Y. Jiang, and Z. Wang, “Fsgs: Real-time few-
shot view synthesis using gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.00451, 2023.
[189] J. Chung, J. Oh, and K. M. Lee, “Depth-regularized optimization
for 3d gaussian splatting in few-shot images,” in CVPR, 2024, pp.
811–820.
[190] A. Paliwal, W. Ye, J. Xiong, D. Kotovenko, R. Ranjan, V. Chandra,
and N. K. Kalantari, “Coherentgs: Sparse novel view synthesis
with coherent 3d gaussians,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19495,
2024.
[191] Y. Chen, H. Xu, C. Zheng, B. Zhuang, M. Pollefeys, A. Geiger,
T.-J. Cham, and J. Cai, “Mvsplat: Efficient 3d gaussian splatting
from sparse multi-view images,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.14627,
2024.
[192] H. Xiong, S. Muttukuru, R. Upadhyay, P. Chari, and A. Kadambi,
“Sparsegs: Real-time 360◦sparse view synthesis using gaussian
splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00206, 2023.
[193] Z. Bao, G. Liao, K. Zhou, K. Liu, Q. Li, and G. Qiu,
“Loopsparsegs: Loop based sparse-view friendly gaussian splat-
ting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00254, 2024.

<!-- page 20 -->
20
[194] J. Zhang, J. Li, X. Yu, L. Huang, L. Gu, J. Zheng, and X. Bai, “Cor-
gs: Sparse-view 3d gaussian splatting via co-regularization,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.12110, 2024.
[195] J. Li, J. Zhang, X. Bai, J. Zheng, X. Ning, J. Zhou, and L. Gu,
“Dngaussian: Optimizing sparse-view 3d gaussian radiance
fields with global-local depth normalization,” in CVPR, 2024, pp.
20 775–20 785.
[196] Z. Fan, W. Cong, K. Wen, K. Wang, J. Zhang, X. Ding, D. Xu,
B. Ivanovic, M. Pavone, G. Pavlakos et al., “Instantsplat: Un-
bounded sparse-view pose-free gaussian splatting in 40 sec-
onds,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.20309, 2024.
[197] J. Straub, T. Whelan, L. Ma, Y. Chen, E. Wijmans, S. Green, J. J.
Engel, R. Mur-Artal, C. Ren, S. Verma et al., “The replica dataset:
A digital replica of indoor spaces,” arXiv:1906.05797, 2019.
[198] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and
M. Nießner, “Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of
indoor scenes,” in CVPR, 2017, pp. 5828–5839.
[199] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cremers,
“A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems,” in 2012
IEEE/RSJ int. conf. on intelligent robots and systems, 2012, pp. 573–
580.
[200] Z. Wang, A. C. Bovik, H. R. Sheikh, and E. P. Simoncelli, “Image
quality assessment: from error visibility to structural similarity,”
IEEE trans. on image processing, vol. 13, no. 4, pp. 600–612, 2004.
[201] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang,
“The unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual
metric,” in CVPR, 2018, pp. 586–595.
[202] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, and R. Urtasun, “Are we ready for au-
tonomous driving? the kitti vision benchmark suite,” in CVPR,
2012, pp. 3354–3361.
[203] P. Sun, H. Kretzschmar, X. Dotiwalla, A. Chouard, V. Patnaik,
P. Tsui, J. Guo, Y. Zhou, Y. Chai, B. Caine et al., “Scalability in
perception for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset,” in
CVPR, 2020, pp. 2446–2454.
[204] H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, V. E. Liong, Q. Xu,
A. Krishnan, Y. Pan, G. Baldan, and O. Beijbom, “nuscenes: A
multimodal dataset for autonomous driving,” in CVPR, 2020, pp.
11 621–11 631.
[205] M.-F. Chang, J. Lambert, P. Sangkloy, J. Singh, S. Bak, A. Hartnett,
D. Wang, P. Carr, S. Lucey, D. Ramanan et al., “Argoverse: 3d
tracking and forecasting with rich maps,” in CVPR, 2019, pp.
8748–8757.
[206] A. Knapitsch, J. Park, Q.-Y. Zhou, and V. Koltun, “Tanks and
temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruction,” ACM
Trans. Graph., vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[207] J. Shotton, B. Glocker, C. Zach, S. Izadi, A. Criminisi, and
A. Fitzgibbon, “Scene coordinate regression forests for camera
relocalization in rgb-d images,” in CVPR, 2013, pp. 2930–2937.
[208] A. Mirzaei, T. Aumentado-Armstrong, K. G. Derpanis, J. Kelly,
M. A. Brubaker, I. Gilitschenski, and A. Levinshtein, “Spin-nerf:
Multiview segmentation and perceptual inpainting with neural
radiance fields,” in CVPR, 2023, pp. 20 669–20 679.
[209] J. Kerr, C. M. Kim, K. Goldberg, A. Kanazawa, and M. Tancik,
“Lerf: Language embedded radiance fields,” in ICCV, 2023, pp.
19 729–19 739.
[210] S. James, Z. Ma, D. R. Arrojo, and A. J. Davison, “Rlbench: The
robot learning benchmark & learning environment,” RA-L, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 3019–3026, 2020.
[211] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, J. Wong, S. Nasiriany, C. Wang, R. Kulkarni,
L. Fei-Fei, S. Savarese, Y. Zhu, and R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın, “What
matters in learning from offline human demonstrations for robot
manipulation,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2108.03298, 2021.
[212] T. Haarnoja, A. Zhou, P. Abbeel, and S. Levine, “Soft actor-critic:
Off-policy maximum entropy deep reinforcement learning with
a stochastic actor,” in Int. conf. on machine learning.
PMLR, 2018,
pp. 1861–1870.
[213] A. Chang, A. Dai, T. Funkhouser, M. Halber, M. Niessner,
M. Savva, S. Song, A. Zeng, and Y. Zhang, “Matterport3d:
Learning from rgb-d data in indoor environments,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1709.06158, 2017.
[214] K. Yadav, R. Ramrakhya, S. K. Ramakrishnan, T. Gervet, J. Turner,
A. Gokaslan, N. Maestre, A. X. Chang, D. Batra, M. Savva et al.,
“Habitat-matterport 3d semantics dataset,” in CVPR, 2023, pp.
4927–4936.
[215] M. Savva, A. Kadian, O. Maksymets, Y. Zhao, E. Wijmans, B. Jain,
J. Straub, J. Liu, V. Koltun, J. Malik et al., “Habitat: A platform for
embodied ai research,” in ICCV, 2019, pp. 9339–9347.
[216] P. Anderson, A. Chang, D. S. Chaplot, A. Dosovitskiy, S. Gupta,
V. Koltun, J. Kosecka, J. Malik, R. Mottaghi, M. Savva et al.,
“On evaluation of embodied navigation agents,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1807.06757, 2018.
[217] C. R. Givens and R. M. Shortt, “A class of wasserstein metrics for
probability distributions.” Michigan Mathematical Journal, vol. 31,
no. 2, pp. 231–240, 1984.
[218] A. Adkins, T. Chen, and J. Biswas, “Obvi-slam: Long-term object-
visual slam,” RA-L, 2024.
[219] M. Zhao, X. Guo, L. Song, B. Qin, X. Shi, G. H. Lee, and G. Sun,
“A general framework for lifelong localization and mapping in
changing environment,” in IROS, 2021.
[220] Y. Wu, L. Pan, W. Wu, G. Wang, Y. Miao, and H. Wang, “Rl-
gsbridge: 3d gaussian splatting based real2sim2real method for
robotic manipulation learning,” arXiv:2409.20291, 2024.
[221] T. Zhang, H.-X. Yu, R. Wu, B. Y. Feng, C. Zheng, N. Snavely,
J. Wu, and W. T. Freeman, “Physdreamer: Physics-based in-
teraction with 3d objects via video generation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.13026, 2024.
