<!-- page 1 -->
SLAM3R: Real-Time Dense Scene Reconstruction from Monocular RGB Videos
Yuzheng Liu1*
Siyan Dong2*†
Shuzhe Wang3
Yingda Yin1
Yanchao Yang2†
Qingnan Fan4
Baoquan Chen1†
1Peking University
2The University of Hong Kong
3Aalto University
4VIVO
Abstract
In this paper, we introduce SLAM3R, a novel and ef-
fective system for real-time, high-quality, dense 3D recon-
struction using RGB videos.
SLAM3R provides an end-
to-end solution by seamlessly integrating local 3D recon-
struction and global coordinate registration through feed-
forward neural networks. Given an input video, the sys-
tem first converts it into overlapping clips using a sliding
window mechanism. Unlike traditional pose optimization-
based methods, SLAM3R directly regresses 3D pointmaps
from RGB images in each window and progressively aligns
and deforms these local pointmaps to create a globally con-
sistent scene reconstruction - all without explicitly solving
any camera parameters. Experiments across datasets con-
sistently show that SLAM3R achieves state-of-the-art re-
construction accuracy and completeness while maintain-
ing real-time performance at 20+ FPS. Code available at:
https://github.com/PKU-VCL-3DV/SLAM3R.
1. Introduction
Dense 3D reconstruction, a long-standing challenge in com-
puter vision, aims to capture and reconstruct the detailed ge-
ometry of real-world scenes. Traditional approaches have
largely relied on multi-stage pipelines.
These typically
begin with sparse Simultaneous Localization and Map-
ping (SLAM) [7, 16, 25, 37, 38] or Structure-from-Motion
(SfM) [31, 33, 47, 53, 66] algorithms to estimate camera
parameters, followed by Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [18, 48,
60, 68] techniques to fill in scene details. While these meth-
ods offer high-quality reconstructions, they often require of-
fline processing to produce a complete model, which limits
their applicability in real-world scenarios.
In the literature, dense SLAM approaches [5, 9, 10, 17,
22, 39, 42, 55, 56, 76, 78] have been developed to address
dense scene reconstruction as a complete system. How-
ever, these approaches often fall short in terms of recon-
struction accuracy or completeness, or they rely heavily on
*Joint first authors: liu yuzheng@stu.pku.edu.cn, siyan3d@hku.hk
†Corresponding authors
Figure 1.
We introduce a novel dense reconstruction system -
SLAM3R. It takes a monocular RGB video as input and recon-
structs the scene as a dense pointcloud. The video is converted
into short clips for local reconstruction (denoted as inner-window),
which are then incrementally registered together (inter-window) to
create a global scene model. This process runs in real-time, pro-
ducing a reconstruction that is both accurate and complete.
depth sensors.
Recently, several monocular SLAM sys-
tems [29, 46, 73, 75, 77, 79] have been proposed to tackle
dense scene reconstruction from RGB videos. By incorpo-
rating advanced scene representations [24, 36, 40, 57, 62],
these systems produce accurate and complete scene recon-
structions. However, this comes at the cost of reduced run-
ning efficiency. For example, NICER-SLAM [79] operates
at a speed significantly below 1 FPS. Therefore, current ap-
proaches struggle with at least one of three key criteria: re-
construction accuracy, completeness, or efficiency.
While monocular dense SLAM systems encounter the
limitations mentioned earlier, recent advances in two-view
geometry have shown promising potential. DUSt3R [64]
introduces a purely end-to-end approach for learning dense
reconstruction. Trained on large-scale datasets, its network
1
arXiv:2412.09401v3  [cs.CV]  23 Mar 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
is capable of producing high-quality dense reconstructions
from paired images in real-time.
However, for multiple
views, a global optimization step is required to align these
image pairs, which significantly hampers its efficiency. A
concurrent work, Spann3R [61], extends DUSt3R to multi-
view (video) scenarios through an incremental pipeline with
spatial memory. While this method accelerates the recon-
struction process, it unfortunately results in noticeable ac-
cumulated drift and reduced reconstruction quality.
To address these challenges, we present SLAM3R (pro-
nounced “slæm@r”), a real-time dense 3D reconstruction
system using RGB-only videos as input.
Unlike tradi-
tional SLAM problems, SLAM3R performs implicit cam-
era localization and focuses more on dense scene mapping,
where 3R stands for 3D Reconstruction. SLAM3R com-
prises a two-hierarchy framework. First, it reconstructs lo-
cal 3D geometry from a sliding window that processes short
clips from the input video. Then, it progressively regis-
ters these local reconstructions to build a globally consis-
tent 3D scene. Both modules are developed with simple
yet effective feed-forward models, enabling end-to-end and
efficient scene reconstruction. Specifically, the two mod-
ules are the Image-to-Points (I2P) network and the Local-
to-World (L2W) network.
The I2P module, inspired by
DUSt3R, selects a keyframe in a local window as the co-
ordinate system reference. It directly predicts the dense 3D
point map supported by the remaining frames within that
window. The L2W module incrementally fuses locally re-
constructed points into a coherent global coordinate system.
Both processes reconstruct the 3D points without explicitly
estimating any camera parameters.
Through extensive experiments, we demonstrate that
SLAM3R provides high-quality scene reconstructions with
minimal drift, outperforming existing dense SLAM sys-
tems across various benchmarks. Furthermore, SLAM3R
achieves these results at 20+ FPS, bridging the gap between
quality and efficiency in RGB-only dense scene reconstruc-
tion. Our contributions are summarized below:
• We present a novel real-time end-to-end dense 3D recon-
struction system that uses RGB videos to directly pre-
dict 3D pointmaps in a unified coordinate system through
feed-forward neural networks.
• Through careful design, our Image-to-Points module can
process an arbitrary number of images simultaneously, ef-
fectively extending DUSt3R to handle multiple views and
produce higher-quality predictions.
• The proposed Local-to-World module directly aligns pre-
dicted local 3D pointmaps into a unified global coordinate
system. This eliminates the need for explicit camera pa-
rameter estimation and costly global optimization.
• We evaluate our method on multiple public benchmarks.
It achieves state-of-the-art reconstruction quality in terms
of both accuracy and completeness at real-time speeds.
2. Related Work
Traditional offline approaches. Dense 3D pointcloud re-
construction is a long-standing problem in computer vision.
Classical approaches to this problem first determine cam-
era parameters using Structure from Motion (SfM) [31, 33,
47, 53, 66], followed by dense 3D points triangulation with
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [1, 18, 48, 60, 68]. In recent
years, neural implicit [8, 30, 36, 62, 65] and 3D Gaus-
sian [12, 19, 20] representations have been applied to fur-
ther enhance the quality of dense reconstruction.
While
these methods deliver high-quality results, they have a sig-
nificant limitation: the requirement for offline processing
to generate the final 3D model, which restricts their appli-
cability in real-time scenarios. In this paper, we focus on
online dense reconstruction in the context of Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM).
Dense SLAM. Early works on SLAM [4, 7, 15, 16, 25, 37,
38] focused on reconstructing the structure of unknown en-
vironments while simultaneously localizing camera poses.
These approaches prioritize real-time performance but pro-
duce only sparse structures of the scene. Dense SLAM ap-
proaches [5, 9–11, 17, 22, 27, 39, 42, 55, 56, 76, 78] in-
corporate detailed scene geometry information to improve
pose estimation. DROID-SLAM [56] introduces recurrent
iterative updates of camera poses and pixel-wise depth esti-
mates, while TANDEM [27] proposes an online MVS mod-
ule for depth prediction. These systems enable real-time
dense scene reconstruction. However, their focus on cam-
era trajectory accuracy often results in incomplete and noisy
3D reconstruction. Neural implicit and Gaussian represen-
tations have also been integrated with dense SLAM sys-
tems [9, 21–23, 32, 34, 42, 42, 44, 45, 55, 67, 72, 78].
However, these approaches often rely on additional depth
sensors or focus primarily on novel view synthesis rather
than producing detailed geometric reconstruction.
More recently, several monocular dense SLAM sys-
tems [29, 46, 73, 75, 77, 79] have been developed to produce
dense scene geometry reconstruction. A notable limitation
of these systems is their slow runtime. Among these sys-
tems, GO-SLAM [75] achieves a speed of ∼8 FPS, which
still falls short of real-time capability. Furthermore, these
methods all share a common strategy: they alternate be-
tween solving for camera poses and estimating the scene
representation. In contrast, this paper presents a novel ap-
proach to dense scene reconstruction that eliminates the
need for explicitly solving camera parameters, offering a
more efficient and streamlined solution.
End-to-end dense 3D reconstruction. DUSt3R [64] intro-
duces the first purely end-to-end dense 3D reconstruction
pipeline without relying on camera parameters. Recently,
several works have adopted a similar approach for single-
view reconstruction [63], feature matching [28], novel view
synthesis [52, 70], and dynamics reconstruction [74]. These
2

<!-- page 3 -->
successes demonstrate the effectiveness of end-to-end dense
point prediction, inspiring us to develop a dense reconstruc-
tion system with a similar methodology.
While DUSt3R operates in real-time for two-view pre-
dictions, its extension to multiple views involves exhaustive
pairing images and performing an additional global opti-
mization step. This process significantly increases compu-
tational time, thereby hindering its real-time performance.
MASt3R [28] enhances the matching capability of DUSt3R
by adding a match head, achieving more accurate keypoint
correspondences for 3D reconstruction [14], but at the cost
of increased computational time. More recently, the con-
current work Spann3R [61] extends DUSt3R with spatial
memory. It takes a video as input and performs incremental
scene reconstruction in a unified coordinate system without
requiring global optimization. While this approach signifi-
cantly improves runtime efficiency, the incremental recon-
struction pipeline frame by frame leads to noticeable accu-
mulated drift. Unlike Spann3R, our networks at each hier-
archy take multiple frames as input to minimize drift. Addi-
tionally, we propose a self-contained retrieval module that,
when registering a new frame, this module selects not only
its previous few frames but also other similar frames from
long-term history for more global scene reference.
3. Method
Problem statement. Given a monocular video consisting
of a sequence of RGB image frames {Ii ∈RH×W ×3}N
i=1
that captures a static scene, the goal is to reconstruct its
dense 3D poincloud P ∈RM×3, where M is the number of
3D points. Our work focuses on three key objectives: maxi-
mizing 3D points recovery for reconstruction completeness,
improving the accuracy of each recovered point, and achiev-
ing these goals while preserving real-time performance.
System overview. Figure 2 illustrates an overview of the
proposed dense reconstruction system. It consists of two
main components: an Image-to-Points (I2P) network that
recovers local 3D points from video clips, and a Local-to-
World (L2W) network that registers local reconstructions
into a global scene coordinate system. During the recon-
struction of the dense point cloud, the system does not ex-
plicitly solve any camera parameters. Instead, it directly
predicts 3D point maps in unified coordinate systems.
The system starts by applying a sliding window mecha-
nism of length L to convert the input video into short clips
{Wi ∈RL×H×W ×3}. The I2P network then processes
each window Wi to recover local 3D pointmaps. Within
each window, the system selects a keyframe to define a ref-
erence coordinate system for point reconstruction, as de-
tailed in Sec. 3.1. By default, the stride of the sliding win-
dow is set to 1, ensuring each input frame in the video is
selected at least once as a keyframe. For global scene recon-
struction, we initialize the world coordinate system with the
first window and use the reconstructed frames (image and
local point map produced by the I2P) as input for the L2W
model. The L2W model incrementally register these lo-
cal reconstructions into a unified global 3D coordinate sys-
tem. To ensure both accuracy and efficiency during this pro-
cess, the system maintains a limited reservoir of registered
frames, called scene frames. Whenever the L2W model reg-
isters a new keyframe, we retrieve the best-correlated scene
frames as a reference. The details are introduced in Sec. 3.2.
3.1. Inner-Window Local Reconstruction
The Image-to-Points (I2P) model aims to infer dense 3D
pointmaps for every pixel of a keyframe in a given video
clip. By default, the middle image of a window W is chosen
as the keyframe Ikey to define the local coordinate system,
as it is most likely to have the largest overlap with other
frames. The remaining images {Isupi}L−1
i=1 serve as sup-
porting frames. Note that the 3D pointmaps of supporting
frames can also be reconstructed through I2P.
The I2P network draws inspiration from DUSt3R [64],
originally designed for stereo 3D reconstruction. We in-
troduce several simple yet effective modifications to extend
it for multi-view scenarios. The I2P model uses a multi-
branch Vision Transformer (ViT) [13] as its backbone. It
consists of a shared encoder Eimg, two separate decoders
Dkey and Dsup, and a point regression head for final pre-
diction. These components are detailed below.
Image encoder. For a given video clip, the image encoder
Eimg encodes each frame Ii to obtain token representa-
tions Fi ∈RT ×d, where T is the number of tokens and
d is the token dimension.
The encoder Eimg comprises
m ViT encoder blocks, each containing self-attention and
feed-forward layers. The encoding process is denoted as
  F _i^
{
( T \times d )} 
=
 E _ { im g}(I _i^{(H \times W \times 3)}), \ i=1, ..., L. 
The frames are processed independently and in parallel,
with the output divided into two parts:
Fkey for the
keyframe and {Fsupi}L−1
i=1 for the supporting frames.
Keyframe decoder. The keyframe decoder Dkey consists
of n ViT decoder blocks, each containing self-attention,
cross-attention, and feed-forward layers. Unlike DUSt3R
which uses the standard cross-attention, we introduce a
novel multi-view cross-attention to combine information
from different supporting frames. Given the feature tokens
Fkey and {Fsupi}L−1
i=1 , the keyframe decoder Dkey takes
Fkey as input for self-attention and performs cross-attention
between Fkey and {Fsupi}L−1
i=1 . A decoder block is illus-
trated in Figure 3. For each cross-attention layer, queries are
taken from Fkey, while keys and values are extracted from
the supporting tokens Fsupi. These L −1 cross-attention
layers are independent of each other, allowing for parallel
processing. A max-pooling layer is then employed to ag-
gregate features after cross-attention. We obtain decoded
3

<!-- page 4 -->
Figure 2. System overview. Given an input monocular RGB video, we apply a sliding window mechanism to convert it into overlapping
clips (referred to as windows). Each window is fed into an Image-to-Points (I2P) network to recover 3D points in a local coordinate
system. Next, the local points are incrementally fed into a Local-to-World (L2W) network to create a globally consistent scene model. The
proposed I2P and L2W networks elegantly share similar architectures. In the I2P step (Sec. 3.1), we select a keyframe as a reference to set
up a local coordinate system and use the remaining frames in the window to estimate the 3D geometry captured within it. The points from
the first window are used to establish the world coordinate system. We then incrementally fuse the following windows in the L2W step
(Sec. 3.2). This process involves retrieving the most relevant already-registered keyframes as a reference, and integrating new keyframes.
Through this iterative process, we eventually obtain the full scene reconstruction.
keyframe tokens Gkey as:
  G_ { key} = D_{ key}(F _{ke y}, F_{sup_1}, ..., F_{sup_{L-1}}) . 
Figure 3. Illustration of a decoder block in the proposed keyframe
decoder Dkey. We present a minimalist modification to integrate
information from different supporting images. Our approach tra-
verses each of them, selects its token keys and values, and uses the
keyframe queries to interact with them separately across the sup-
porting images. This multi-view information is then aggregated
through max-pooling. The registration decoder Dreg and scene
decoder Dsce (described in Sec. 3.2) share the same architecture.
Supporting decoder. The supporting decoder Dsup is de-
signed to complement the keyframe decoder. It inherits the
decoder architecture used in DUSt3R, consisting of n stan-
dard ViT decoder blocks. The cross-attention mechanism
is applied only to exchange information with the keyframe.
Note that all supporting frames share the same Dsup. This
process is denoted as
  G_{ s up_i} = D_{ sup}(F _ { su p_i} ,  F_{key}), \ i=1, ..., L-1. 
Points reconstruction. Similar to DUSt3R, we apply a lin-
ear head [64] to regress dense 3D pointmaps in the uni-
fied coordinate system from decoded tokens. In addition
to the pointmaps, we also predict the confidence maps for
all frames to evaluate their reliability. The final predictions
are:
  \hat  {X
}
_ i^{(H \ti
m
e s W \ tim
e
s 3 ) },  \ha t {C}_i^{(H \times W \times 1)} = \text {H}(G_i^{(T \times d)}), \ i=1, ..., L. 
Training loss.
Following DUSt3R, the I2P network
is trained end-to-end using ground-truth scene points
{Xi}L
i=1. Both the ground truth and predicted point maps
are normalized to a canonical scale, determined by the av-
erage distance of all valid points within the window to the
origin. The confidence-aware training loss is:
  \m a
t
h
cal
 { L } _{I 2 P} =
 \
sum _
{ i=1 } ^ L M_i \cdot ( \hat {C}_i \cdot \text {L1}(\frac {1}{\hat {z}}\hat {X}_i, \frac {1}{z}X_i) - \alpha \ \text {log} \hat {C}_i ) , g
where Mi represents a mask of valid points that have
ground-truth values in Xi, z and ˆz are the scale factor, ˆCi
is the confidence map, the operator · denotes the element-
wise matrix multiplication, L1(·) denotes the point-wise
Euclidean distance, and α is a hyper-parameter to control
the regularization term. We will detail the process in Sec 4.
3.2. Inter-Window Global Registration
After obtaining the 3D pointmap { ˆXkey} from the I2P
network, we use the inter-window Local-to-World (L2W)
4

<!-- page 5 -->
model to incrementally register the newly generated
pointmap into a global 3D coordinate system. Similar to the
I2P network, the L2W model also relies on some frames to
serve as a reference for the scene coordinate system. Fur-
thermore, it can leverage multiple registered keyframes as a
global reference. These registered keyframes are referred to
as scene frames and they are maintained in a buffering set
through a sampling mechanism.
The buffering set is designed for scalability in handling
long videos. We apply a reservoir strategy [59] that main-
tains a maximum of B registered frames in the buffering set.
When a new keyframe is inferred from I2P and ready for
fusion, we retrieve the top-K best-correlated scene frames
from the buffering set as its support for global registration.
Scene initialization. The first window is used to initialize
the scene model. It’s crucial to ensure this initialization is
as accurate as possible. To achieve this, we execute the I2P
network L times, attempting to traverse and designate each
frame within the window as the keyframe. We then select
the result with the highest total confidence score for scene
model initialization. This process results in a scene point-
cloud along with a set of registered frames. All these frames
are regarded as scene frames, and they are used to initialize
the buffering set.
Reservoir and retrieval.
Each scene frame Iscei is
recorded with its latent feature Fscei and pointmaps ˜Xscei.
For efficiency, we apply reservoir sampling to allow storing
an unbiased subset of an empirical distribution in a bounded
amount of memory. The first B registered frames chosen
are directly inserted into the buffering set. For each subse-
quent frame with id > B, the probability of inserting it is
B/id. If chosen for insertion, it will randomly replace one
of the current scene frames in the buffering set.
Given a new keyframe Ikey to be registered, we feed its
feature Fkey and the features from the buffering set into a
retrieval module,
  \text {Re tr iev
al}
( F_ {k ey}
^{(T
 \times d)}, \{F_{sce_i}^{(T \times d)}\}), 
to obtain a list of correlation scores, measuring both
the visual similarity and baseline suitability between the
keyframe and the scene frames in the buffering set. The re-
trieval module uses the first r decoder blocks from the I2P
module as its backbone. A linear projection and an average-
pooling layer follow, together producing an image-wise cor-
relation score. We then select the top-K scene frames as a
global reference to fuse the current keyframe. As a result,
we have K scene frames and one keyframe as the input for
the following L2W model.
Points embedding. The 3D pointmaps reconstructed by the
I2P model are encoded into the L2W model using a patch
embedding method similar to image patchification in the
ViT encoder Eimg. We process the new keyframe and K
retrieved scene frames in parallel as:
  \ mat
h
c al {P }_i^{( T \
t
im e s  d )} =  E _{pts}(\hat {X}_i^{(H \times W \times 3)}), \ i=1, ..., K+1. 
The encoded geometric tokens are combined with their cor-
responding visual tokens by
  \ mat
h
c a l {F}
_
i ^{( T \
t
i m e s d)} =  F_i^{(T \times d)} +\mathcal {P}_i^{(T \times d)}, \ i=1, ..., K+1. 
This resulting a token set {Fkey, {Fscei}K
i=1} contains joint
features of image patch appearance and 3D geometry for
the keyframe and retrieved scene frames. In the following
decoders, {P} are further accumulated to {F} between ad-
jacent blocks to enhance the geometric representation.
Registration decoder. The registration decoder Dreg takes
feature tokens {Fkey, {Fscei}K
i=1} as input and aims to
transform the local reconstruction of the keyframe to the
scene coordinate system. It takes the same network archi-
tecture of the keyframe decoder Dkey. This decoding pro-
cess is denoted by
  \m a thcal {G}_ {key} = D_ {reg}(\mathcal {F}_{key}, \mathcal {F}_{sce_1}, ..., \mathcal {F}_{sce_{K}}) . 
Scene decoder. The scene decoder Dsce takes the token set
{Fkey, {Fscei}K
i=1} as input to refine the scene geometry
without coordinate system changes. It uses the same net-
work architecture as the keyframe decoder Dkey, allowing
us to extend to multi-keyframe co-registration (see supple-
mentary material for details). By default, we register one
keyframe each time. Each of the Fscei has information ex-
change only with the Fkey. This decoding process is de-
noted by
  \ma t hcal {G}_{s ce_i} =  D_ {sce }(\mathcal {F}_{sce_i}, \mathcal {F}_{key}), \ i=1, ..., K. 
Points reconstruction and training loss. We apply the
same head design as that of the I2P network to predict all
the pointmaps ˜Xi in the global scene coordinate system:
  \til de 
{
X }_i^{( H \
t
i mes W  \t
i
me s  3) }, \ t i lde {C}_i^{(H \times W \times 1)} = \text {H}(\mathcal {G}_i^{(T \times d)}), \ i=1, ..., K+1. 
We train the L2W network using a similar loss function as
the I2P network. Differently, no normalization is applied
to the predicted point map, as the output scale must align
with the scene frames in the input. This alignment ensures
that the output can be directly integrated into the existing
reconstruction. The training loss of the L2W network is:
  \m a
t
h
cal
 { L } _{L 2 W} = \s um _ { i=1}^L M_i \cdot ( \tilde {C}_i \cdot \text {L1}(\tilde {X}_i, X_i) - \alpha \ \text {log} \tilde {C}_i ) . g
The following section provides a detailed discussion of the
training process and its implementation details.
5

<!-- page 6 -->
Method
Chess
Fire
Heads
Office
Pumpkin
RedKitchen
Stairs
Average
FPS
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
DUSt3R [64]
2.26 / 2.13
1.04 / 1.50
1.66 / 0.98
4.62 / 4.74
1.73 / 2.43
1.95 / 2.36
3.37 / 10.75
2.19 / 3.24
<1
MASt3R [28]
2.08 / 2.12
1.54 / 1.43
1.06 / 1.04
3.23 / 3.19
5.68 / 3.07
3.50 / 3.37
2.36 / 13.16
3.04 / 3.90
≪1
Spann3R [61]
2.23 / 1.68
0.88 / 0.92
2.67 / 0.98
5.86 / 3.54
2.25 / 1.85
2.68 / 1.80
5.65 / 5.15
3.42 / 2.41
>50
SLAM3R-NoConf (Ours)
2.12 / 1.21
0.95 / 0.80
3.23 / 1.67
2.59 / 2.21
1.99 / 2.04
2.09 / 1.88
4.54 / 6.38
2.40 / 2.24
∼25
SLAM3R (Ours)
1.63 / 1.31
0.84 / 0.83
2.95 / 1.22
2.32 / 2.26
1.81 / 2.05
1.84 / 1.94
4.19 / 6.91
2.13 / 2.34
∼25
Table 1. Reconstruction results on 7 Scenes [51] dataset.
The average numbers are computed over all test sequences. The methods are
categorized into two groups based on whether their FPS is above or below 1. The best results within each category are shown in bold. We
report accuracy and completeness in centimeters. The color gradient shifts from red through yellow to green to show increasing FPS.
Method
Room 0
Room 1
Room 2
Office 0
Office 1
Office 2
Office 3
Office 4
Average
FPS
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
Acc. / Comp.
DUSt3R [64]
3.47 / 2.50
2.53 / 1.86
2.95 / 1.76
4.92 / 3.51
3.09 / 2.21
4.01 / 3.10
3.27 / 2.25
3.66 / 2.61
3.49 / 2.48
<1
MASt3R [28]
4.01 / 4.10
3.61 / 3.25
3.13 / 2.15
2.57 / 1.63
12.85 / 8.13
3.13 / 1.99
4.67 / 3.15
3.69 / 2.47
4.71 / 3.36
≪1
NICER-SLAM [79]*
2.53 / 3.04
3.93 / 4.10
3.40 / 3.42
5.49 / 6.09
3.45 / 4.42
4.02 / 4.29
3.34 / 4.03
3.03 / 3.87
3.65 / 4.16
≪1
DROID-SLAM [56]*
12.18 / 8.96
8.35 / 6.07
3.26 / 16.01
3.01 / 16.19
2.39 / 16.20
5.66 / 15.56
4.49 / 9.73
4.65 / 9.63
5.50 / 12.29
∼20
DIM-SLAM [29]*
14.19 / 6.24
9.56 / 6.45
8.41 / 12.17
10.16 / 5.95
7.86 / 8.33
16.50 / 8.28
13.01 / 6.77
13.08 / 8.62
11.60 / 7.85
∼3
GO-SLAM [75]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
3.81 / 4.79
∼8
Spann3R [61]
9.75 / 12.94
15.51 / 12.94
7.28 / 8.50
5.46 / 18.75
5.24 / 16.64
9.33 / 11.80
16.00 / 9.03
13.97 / 16.02
10.32 / 13.33
>50
SLAM3R-NoConf (Ours)
3.37 / 2.40
3.22 / 2.33
3.15 / 2.00
4.43 / 2.59
3.18 / 2.34
3.95 / 2.78
4.20 / 3.15
4.57 / 3.38
3.76 / 2.62
∼24
SLAM3R (Ours)
3.19 / 2.40
3.12 / 2.34
2.72 / 2.00
4.28 / 2.60
3.17 / 2.34
3.84 / 2.78
3.90 / 3.16
4.32 / 3.36
3.57 / 2.62
∼24
Table 2. Reconstruction results on Replica [54] dataset. * denotes the results reported in NICER-SLAM.
DUSt3R [64]
MASt3R [28]
NICER-SLAM [79]*
DROID-SLAM [56]*
DIM-SLAM [29]
GO-SLAM [75]
Spann3R [61]
SLAM3R-NoConf (Ours)
SLAM3R (Ours)
7 Scenes
8.02
6.28
8.55
5.66
-
-
11.70
8.44
8.41
Replica
4.76
1.67
1.88
0.33
0.46
0.39
32.79
6.61
6.61
Table 3. Camera pose results evaluated by ATE-RMSE (cm) on 7 Scenes [51] and Replica [54] datasets.
Figure 4. We visualize the reconstruction results on two scenes: Office-09 and Office 2 from the 7-Scenes [51] and Replica [54] datasets.
Our method runs in real-time and achieves high-quality reconstruction comparable to the offline method DUSt3R [64].
4. Experiments
Datasets. For both the Image-to-Points (I2P) and Local-
to-World (L2W) models, we perform training with a mix-
ture of three datasets: ScanNet++ [71], Aria Synthetic En-
vironments [3] and CO3D-v2 [41].
These datasets vary
from scene-level to object-centric, and contain both real-
world and synthetic scenes. Since they are all recorded se-
quentially, we can easily extract video clips with a sliding-
window mechanism as our training data. We select about
850K clips for training in total. To validate our reconstruc-
tion quality, we conduct quantitative evaluations on two un-
seen datasets: 7 Scenes [51], a real-world dataset of partial
scenes, and Replica [54], a synthetic dataset of complete
scenes. We also demonstrate visual reconstruction results
across diverse datasets and in-the-wild captured videos to
showcase the generalization ability of SLAM3R.
Implementation details. Both the I2P and L2W models
build upon the architecture of DUSt3R [64] with minimal
but effective modifications, making it natural for them to
6

<!-- page 7 -->
Figure 5. Qualitative examples. We show our reconstruction results on Tanks and Temples [26], BlendedMVS [69], Map-free Reloc [2],
LLFF [35], and ETH3D [49, 50] datasets, as well as in-the-wild captured videos, to demonstrate SLAM3R’s generalization ability.
initialize their weights from the DUSt3R pre-trained model.
We initialize our weights using the DUSt3R model trained
on 224×224 resolution images with m = 24 encoder
blocks, n = 12 decoder blocks with linear heads.
All
images are center-cropped to 224×224 pixels before feed-
ing into SLAM3R. Our training is conducted on 8 NVIDIA
4090D GPUs, each with 24 GB of memory. It takes about
one day. At test time, we set the initial window length to
L = 5 to ensure high-quality reconstruction of all frames
within the window. For subsequent incremental windows,
we use L = 11 to provide more supporting views for better
keyframe reconstruction. Please refer to our supplementary
material for more implementation details.
4.1. Comparisons
Evaluation metrics. Following NICER-SLAM [79] and
Spann3R [61], we build a ground-truth point cloud model
for each test sequence by back-projecting pixels to the
world using ground-truth depths and camera parameters.
The reconstructed point clouds are aligned to ground truths
using Umeyama [58] and ICP [43] algorithms. We quantify
reconstruction quality through accuracy and completeness
metrics. To demonstrate computational efficiency, we re-
port frames per second (FPS) on a single NVIDIA 4090D
GPU. We also evaluate camera poses using absolute trajec-
tory error (ATE-RMSE). For detailed formulations of the
metrics, please refer to the supplementary material.
Reconstruction results on the 7 Scenes [51] dataset. The
numerical results of scene reconstruction quality are re-
ported in Table 1. Following Spann3R [61]’s setting, we
uniformly sample one-twentieth of the frames in each test
sequence as input video.
Each video is regarded as an
individual scene.
We evaluate SLAM3R using two set-
tings: integrating the full pointmaps predicted for all in-
put frames to create reconstruction results (denoted by
SLAM3R-NoConf), and filtering pointmaps with a confi-
dence threshold of 3 before creating reconstruction results
(SLAM3R). We compare our method with optimization-
based reconstruction DUSt3R [64], triangulation-based
MASt3R [28],
and online incremental reconstruction
Spann3R. Our method outperforms all baselines in both ac-
curacy and completeness while maintaining real-time per-
formance. As shown in the Office-09 scene (the top row in
Figure 4), our approach demonstrates much less drift com-
pared to the concurrent work Spann3R [61].
Reconstruction results on the Replica [54] dataset.
Besides the baselines mentioned in 7 Scene datasets,
we also compare the SLAM-based reconstruction ap-
proaches NICER-SLAM [79], DROID-SLAM [56], DIM-
SLAM [29] and GO-SLAM [75] on the Replica [54]
dataset.
The numerical results on full scene reconstruc-
tion are reported in Table 2.
Due to the memory con-
straint, DUSt3R [64] and MASt3R [28] process only one-
twentieth of the frames for reconstruction.
As is shown
in the table, our method surpasses all baselines with FPS
greater than 1.
Notably, without any optimization pro-
cedure, our method achieves reconstruction quality com-
parable to optimization-based methods such as NICER-
7

<!-- page 8 -->
Method
# Frames
Acc.
Comp.
FPS
DUSt3R [64]
2
3.16
2.89
42.55
I2P
2
3.39
3.04
42.55
I2P
5
2.62
2.28
40.82
I2P (Default)
11
2.38
2.03
40.11
I2P
15
2.27
1.94
35.51
I2P
51
2.23
1.86
11.97
Table 4. Inner-window keyframe reconstruction results with var-
ious window lengths. By default, we use 11-frame windows for
incremental reconstruction to balance quality and efficiency.
SLAM [79] and DUSt3R [64]. Example of the Office 2
(the bottom row in Figure 4) also illustrates the global con-
sistency of our reconstruction result.
Camera
pose
estimation
on
7
Scenes
[51]
and
Replica [54]. Our method is designed in a new paradigm
that reconstructs 3D points end-to-end without explicitly
solving camera parameters. Following DUSt3R [64], We
also derive camera poses from the predicted scene points us-
ing PnP-RANSAC solver in OpenCV [6] with ground truth
camera intrinsics of each frame. The results are reported in
Table 3. We can observe that camera poses and scene recon-
struction results are not fully positively correlated. This dis-
crepancy between pose and reconstruction errors indicates
that effective end-to-end 3D reconstruction is possible and
promising without first obtaining precise camera poses.
For more details on the comparisons in this section,
please refer to our supplementary material.
4.2. Analyses
Effectiveness of the I2P model. To highlight the advan-
tages of our multi-view I2P model over the original two-
view DUSt3R [64], we evaluate the reconstruction quality
of keyframes with varying numbers of supporting views.
We conduct experiments on the Replica [54] dataset, where
input views are sampled using a sliding window of different
sizes, and the reconstruction accuracy and completeness of
the keyframes are computed. The results are reported in Ta-
ble 4. As the number of supporting views increases, our ap-
proach progressively improves reconstruction quality. No-
tably, the efficiency of our method remains stable until the
window size exceeds 11, demonstrating the effectiveness of
our parallel design. However, the results also show dimin-
ishing returns as the number of views increases, which we
detail in the supplementary material. Visual results of I2P
reconstruction can be found in Figure 1.
Advantages of the L2W model.
The effectiveness of
the L2W model is evaluated through ablation studies on
the Replica [54] dataset. Per-window reconstructions are
first generated with a window size of 11 using the I2P
model.
Local points are then aligned to a unified coor-
dinate frame using different methods: global optimization
Method
Acc.
Comp.
FPS
I2P+GA
4.87
3.00
∼3
I2P+UI
7.47
3.86
∼1
I2P+L2W
6.19
3.54
∼92
I2P+L2W+Re (Full)
3.62
2.70
∼43
Table 5.
Reconstruction results using various point alignment
methods and scene frame selection strategies. The FPS reported
only accounts for the overhead of the alignment operation.
from DUSt3R [64] (I2P-GA), traditional approaches such
as Umeyama [58] and ICP [43] (I2P+UI), and our L2W
model (I2P+L2W+Re). For consistency, we set the win-
dow size for global optimization to 10, which is equal to the
number of views used to align new frames in other meth-
ods. Results in Table 5 show that our full method achieves
superior alignment accuracy and computational efficiency
compared to the alternatives.
Analysis of the retrieval module.
We propose a
lightweight retrieval module that selects historical scene
frames from the reservoir. This approach effectively per-
forms implicit re-localization.
We compare our retrieval
method with a baseline approach that selects the ten near-
est previous frames, named I2P+L2W. The results in Table
5 indicate a significant performance improvement with our
retrieval strategy, demonstrating its effectiveness.
In-the-wild scene reconstruction.
We have tested our
method on a diverse range of unseen datasets and found
that SLAM3R shows strong generalization capabilities.
Figure 5 shows our reconstruction results on Tanks and
Temples [26], BlendedMVS [69], Map-free Reloc [2],
LLFF [35], and ETH3D [49, 50] datasets, as well as in-
the-wild videos we captured. These results show that our
method performs reliably across different scales and scenes.
We also provide additional numerical results on sampled
scenes from these datasets in the supplementary material.
5. Conclusion
In this paper, we present SLAM3R, a novel and effec-
tive system that performs real-time, high-quality, dense 3D
scene reconstruction using RGB videos. It employs a two-
hierarchy neural network framework to perform end-to-end
3D reconstruction through streamlined feed-forward pro-
cesses, eliminating the need to explicitly solve any camera
parameters. Experiments demonstrate its state-of-the-art re-
construction quality and real-time efficiency (20+ FPS).
Limitations and future work. The elimination of camera
parameter prediction prevents us from performing global
bundle adjustment. Additionally, the poses derived from
our scene point cloud prediction still fall short of SLAM
systems that specialize in camera localization. Addressing
these limitations will be the focus of our future work.
8

<!-- page 9 -->
6. Acknowledgments
This work is supported by the National Key R&D Pro-
gram of China (2022ZD0160800). This work is also sup-
ported by the Early Career Scheme of the Research Grants
Council (grant # 27207224), the HKU-100 Award, a dona-
tion from the Musketeers Foundation, and in part by the
JC STEM Lab of Robotics for Soft Materials funded by
The Hong Kong Jockey Club Charities Trust. We thank
the reviewers for their valuable feedback, as well as Zihan
Zhu and Songyou Peng for their help with our experiments.
Siyan Dong would also like to thank the support from HKU
School of Computing and Data Science.
Supplementary Material
In this appendix, we first present additional implementa-
tion details and experimental settings in Sec. A and Sec. B,
which were omitted from the main paper due to page limit.
We then report additional analyses in Sec. C. Finally, we
show more reconstruction results of our method in Sec. D.
A. Implementation details
Retrieval module.
We propose a lightweight module for
efficient scene frame retrieval to support the keyframe reg-
istration. The retrieval module directly reuses I2P’s decoder
blocks as its backbone, followed by a linear projection and
an average-pooling layer. Specifically, it uses the first two
blocks from both the supporting and keyframe decoders, for
scene frames and keyframes (awaiting registration), respec-
tively. It takes as input image features of one keyframe and
all the scene frames in the buffering set, predicting correla-
tion scores between the keyframe and each buffering frame.
Notably, the correlation scores share similar behavior with
the mean confidence of the I2P model’s final prediction and
offer unique advantages over the cosine similarity between
image features of two frames. These correlation scores ac-
count for both visual similarity and provide suitable base-
lines for 3D reconstruction.
The module inherits the weights of the first two layers of
the decoder in I2P model. During training, only the weights
of the linear projection are updated using an L1 loss:
  \ma t
h
c
al 
{L}
_ { Retr} &
= \s
um
 _ {i=1}^{R}\lv
er
t  S_i '  - Mean(C_i') \rvert , \\ S_i'&= Sigmoid(S_i) , \\[2mm] C_i' &= (C_i - 1)/C_i ,
where R is the number of input supporting frames, Si is
the predicted correlation score between supporting frame i
and the keyframe, Ci is the predicted confidence from the
complete I2P model. Both Si and Ci are normalized to [0,1]
before calculating the loss.
Multi-keyframe co-registration.
In practice, our scene
decoder in the L2W model adopts the same architecture as
the keyframe decoder in the I2P model, allowing for the si-
multaneous input and registration of multiple keyframes. In
the decoding stage, scene frames and keyframes exchange
information bidirectionally: each scene frame queries fea-
tures from all keyframes, and each keyframe interacts with
all scene frames. Compared to single-keyframe registration,
this extension significantly reduces computational overhead
by registering multiple keyframes with a single pass of
the scene decoder. Furthermore, incorporating information
from additional keyframes enhances the refinement of scene
frame features, leading to more accurate reconstruction for
all input frames.
Training details.
To construct the training data, we utilize
all iPhone and DSLR frames registered by COLMAP [47]
from the training splits of ScanNet++[71]. Additionally,
we include all frames from the first 450 scenes of the Aria
Synthetic Environments (ASE)[3] dataset and 41 categories
from CO3D-v2 [41], with each category containing up to
50 randomly sampled scene sequences. We introduce two
ways to extract video clips for training. For ScanNet++
and ASE, we adopt uniform sampling with strides of 3
and 2, respectively. For CO3D-v2, frames are randomly
sampled within temporal segments covering half the length
of each video.
In total, we extract approximately 850K
clips. During each epoch of training, we randomly sample
4000, 2000, and 2000 clips from the ScanNet++, ASE, and
CO3D-v2 datasets, respectively. All training images are re-
sized and then center-cropped to 224 × 224 pixels. Standard
data augmentation techniques [64] are applied.
To train our I2P model, we extend the training process
of DUSt3R from two views to multiple views. Specifically,
our I2P model takes as input a video clip of length 11, and
designates the middle frame as the keyframe. We train the
I2P model for 100 epochs, which takes about 6 hours. After
that, we train the retrieval module built on the I2P model.
During training, we freeze all other modules and use L1
loss to supervise the correlation score against the mean con-
fidence of the I2P model’s final predictions. This module
requires 50 epochs of training, which takes about 2 hours.
To train the L2W model, we use clips of length 12, with
the first six images selected as scene frames, and the last
six images designated as keyframes to register. The model
is trained for 200 epochs in total, and the training process
takes approximately 16 hours. When training with ground
truth pointmaps as input, we set invalid points to (0,0,0).
A confidence-aware loss without scale normalization is ap-
plied, ensuring that the predicted point maps retain consis-
tent scale with the input scene frames.
Our training is conducted on 8 NVIDIA 4090D GPUs,
each with 24GB of memory and a batch size of 4 per GPU.
9

<!-- page 10 -->
Figure 6. The reconstruction results and the corresponding accuracy heatmaps of MASt3R [28] on Office 3 from Replica [54] dataset under
different confidence thresholds. Lighter colors indicate higher accuracy.
Figure 7. Visualization of the incremental reconstruction process of our method on the Office 3 and Room 1 of Replica [54] dataset. Our
method achieves low drift without any global-optimization stage.
Figure 8. Reconstruction results on unorganized image collections from DTU [1] dataset.
B. Details for experimental settings
Calculation of the evaluation metrics.
To evaluate re-
construction quality, we use accuracy and completeness as
our metrics. They are calculated by:
Accuracy = 1
P
P
X
i=1
minj(D(xi, yj)),
Completeness = 1
Q
Q
X
j=1
mini(D(xi, yj)).
P and Q are the numbers of points in the reconstructed
point cloud and GT point cloud respectively. D(·) repre-
sents Euclidean distance, and xi and yj represent iterating
each point from the reconstructed and GT point cloud.
To measure the efficiency, we report FPS (frames per
10

<!-- page 11 -->
Method
Chess
Fire
Heads
Office
Pumpkin
RedKitchen
Stairs
Average
FPS
DUSt3R [64] (w/PnP)
5.09
4.88
2.52
12.07
10.64
10.35
10.55
8.02
<1
MASt3R [28] (w/PnP)
4.32
2.92
1.47
12.37
11.82
7.98
3.04
6.28
≪1
NICER-SLAM [79]*
3.28
6.85
4.16
10.84
20.00
3.94
10.81
8.55
<1
DROID-SLAM [56]*
3.36
2.40
1.43
9.19
16.46
4.94
1.85
5.66
∼20
Spann3R [61]
9.18
6.69
7.10
21.56
12.83
14.06
10.43
11.70
>50
SLAM3R-NoConf (Ours)
6.29
5.33
4.47
12.42
11.74
9.53
9.30
8.44
∼25
SLAM3R (Ours)
6.20
5.30
4.56
12.40
11.71
9.47
9.20
8.41
∼25
Table 6. Camera pose estimation results on the 7Scenes [51] dataset reported using the ATE-RMSE (cm) metric. The average numbers are
computed over all test scenes. * denotes the results reported in NICER-SLAM.
Method
Room 0
Room 1
Room 2
Office 0
Office 1
Office 2
Office 3
Office 4
Average
FPS
DUSt3R [64] (w/PnP)
4.00
4.49
7.62
4.88
4.04
3.90
2.84
6.30
4.76
<1
MASt3R [28] (w/PnP)
1.07
0.99
0.87
0.90
4.90
1.21
1.77
1.63
1.67
≪1
NICER-SLAM [79]*
1.36
1.60
1.14
2.12
3.23
2.12
1.42
2.01
1.88
<1
GO-SLAM [75]
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.39
∼8
DIM-SLAM [29]
0.48
0.78
0.35
0.67
0.37
0.36
0.33
0.36
0.46
∼3
DROID-SLAM [56]*
0.34
0.13
0.27
0.25
0.42
0.32
0.52
0.40
0.33
∼20
Spann3R [61]
29.76
34.78
26.08
34.50
22.65
34.47
42.24
37.84
32.79
>50
SLAM3R-NoConf (Ours)
4.54
5.89
5.73
11.17
6.32
6.15
4.99
8.05
6.61
∼24
SLAM3R (Ours)
4.56
5.88
5.72
11.17
6.32
6.15
4.95
8.09
6.61
∼24
Table 7. Camera pose estimation results on the Replica [54] dataset reported using the ATE-RMSE (cm) metric.
second), which is calculated by:
FPS = F/time,
where time is the total time used to reconstruct the scene,
and F is the number of frames from the video.
We evaluate the camera pose accuracy using absolute tra-
jectory error (ATE-RMSE), which is formulated by:
ATE-RMSE =
v
u
u
t 1
F
F
X
i=1
D(T gt
i , T perd
i
)2,
where T perd and T gt are the camera center positions of the
predicted and GT camera trajectories.
Full video as input on Replica [54].
On the Replica
dataset, we reconstruct the entire scene geometry using all
video frames. With the stride of the sliding window set to
1, all frames will be used as a keyframe once. For each
window, frames are sampled around the keyframe, with
Skip = 20 frames per supporting frame, to ensure reason-
able camera motion (disparity). We co-register Co = 10
keyframes at each time, which share the same K = 10
scene frames as a reference. These scene frames are se-
lected through a two-step process. First, we calculate the
correlation score between all frames in the buffering set
and the Co keyframes. Then, we select K frames from
the buffering set that show the highest total correlation
score with these keyframes. After every R = 20 regis-
tered keyframes, we update the buffering set by retaining
the keyframes with the highest reconstruction scores, where
reconstruction score of a frame is the product of its mean
confidence predicted by I2P and L2W model. The inser-
tion/update follows the reservoir sampling probability de-
scribed in the main paper.
Sampled frames as input on 7 Scenes [51].
Following
Spann3R [61], the frames in each test sequence are sampled
with a stride of 20, and we only reconstruct the points from
the sampled frames. To handle sampled-frame-only input,
we adapt our reconstruction pipeline for full-video input by
setting Skip = 1, Co = 2, K = 5, and R = 1 in practice.
Experiments on DUSt3R [64] and MASt3R [28].
The
global optimization with complete graph setting in DUSt3R
and MASt3R requires substantial GPU memory. Conse-
quently, to evaluate the global reconstruction quality of
these two methods on the Replica dataset, we uniformly
sample 1/20 of the images.
DUSt3R is tested using the
weight-224 model with a resolution of 224\times 224, the same
as our input resolution, while MASt3R is tested using
the weight-512 model with resolutions of 512×384 and
512×288 as inputs for reconstructing the 7 Scenes [51] and
Replica [54] datasets, respectively. Note that a resolution of
224×224 results in less overlap between adjacent frames,
making reconstruction inherently more challenging.
11

<!-- page 12 -->
Figure 9. Inner-window keyframe reconstruction results from var-
ious window lengths.
During the evaluation, we observed that MASt3R oc-
casionally generates floating points with high confidence
scores, which are difficult to filter using confidence thresh-
olds and significantly degrade accuracy.
An example of
this issue is shown in Figure 6. In contrast, our confidence
scores are more effective and successfully reduce erroneous
points. The results of SLAM3R reported on 7 Scenes and
Replica datasets use a fixed confidence threshold of 3.
C. Additional comparisons and analyses
More numerical results.
We report more quantitative
comparisons of reconstruction results on ScanNet [11],
Tanks and Temples [26], and ETH3D [50] datasets. We
sampled three scenes from each dataset, and report the re-
sults in Table 8. SLAM3R outperforms Spann3R in most
cases and demonstrates performance either comparable to
or better than DUSt3R. These results further verify our
method’s effectiveness.
ScanNet
scene0011 00
scene0015 00
scene0019 00
Average
DUSt3R [64]
5.56 / 3.76
5.04 / 4.10
4.52 / 4.74
5.04 / 4.20
Spann3R [61]
13.09 / 11.37
8.51 / 7.79
7.97 / 9.66
9.86 / 9.61
SLAM3R (Ours)
5.86 / 3.98
5.98 / 5.97
4.27 / 4.34
5.37 / 4.76
Tanks and Temples
Ignitius
Truck
Caterpillar
Average
DUSt3R [64]
3.55/ 1.22
9.31 / 4.85
12.67 / 5.25
8.51 / 3.77
Spann3R [61]
5.51 / 1.10
6.40 / 12.61
11.50/ 5.74
7.80 / 6.48
SLAM3R (Ours)
3.30 / 0.94
5.35/ 5.59
12.26 / 5.05
6.97 / 3.86
ETH3D
plant scene 1
table 3
sofa 1
Average
DUSt3R [64]
2.98 / 2.48
3.13 / 1.30
2.05 / 3.67
2.72 / 2.48
Spann3R [61]
2.54 / 4.25
3.03 / 2.08
2.10 / 4.55
2.56 / 3.62
SLAM3R (Ours)
2.36 / 1.98
2.75 / 1.34
2.13 / 1.90
2.41 / 1.74
Table 8. Reconstruction errors (accuracy / completeness) on Scan-
Net [11], Tanks and Temples [26], and ETH3D [50] datasets.
Diminishing return of window length.
In the main pa-
per, we report the I2P reconstruction results with different
window lengths. Here, we further analyze the diminishing
returns, which indicate that the window length should not
# Scene frames
Acc.
Comp.
FPS
1
4.18
2.61
∼398
5
3.99
2.79
∼247
10
3.57
2.62
∼152
20
3.57
2.60
∼86
30
3.59
2.58
∼61
40
4.15
3.05
∼46
50
4.27
3.15
∼37
Table 9. Reconstruction results on Replica [54] dataset, with vari-
ous maximum number of scene frames selected for keyframe reg-
istration. The FPS of the L2W model aligning 10 keyframes at
once with different numbers of input scene frames is also reported.
be too large. As Figure 9 shows, the accuracy and com-
pleteness of the keyframe reconstruction improve rapidly at
first as input frames increase, but then gradually decline.
This is because larger windows result in less and less over-
lapping. Additionally, the inference time becomes signifi-
cantly slower as length increases. Consequently, we set the
window size to 11 in our main experiments, balancing the
reconstruction quality and runtime efficiency.
Effect of scene frame numbers on registration.
We con-
duct experiments on the Replica [54] dataset to investigate
how the number of scene frames selected as a global refer-
ence affects the registration quality of keyframes. As re-
ported in Table 9, the accuracy of full-scene registration
initially improves as the maximum number of input scene
frames increases but eventually declines beyond a certain
threshold. Retrieving too few scene frames from the buffer-
ing set risks missing suitable frames and causing keyframe
registration to get stuck in local minimums. Conversely, se-
lecting too many scene frames can introduce irrelevant ones
that add noise and hinder registration.
To balance reconstruction accuracy and runtime effi-
ciency, we set the number of retrieved scene frames to 5
and 10 on 7 Scenes [51] and Replica [54] dataset, which
achieves consistent and reliable performance.
Camera pose estimation.
The detailed results are pre-
sented in Table 6 and Table 7.
For DUSt3R [64] and
MASt3R [28], we evaluate the camera poses derived via the
PnP-RANSAC solver with their predicted pointmaps (af-
ter global alignment) and GT intrinsic parameters. When
evaluating Spann3R [61] on the Replica [54] dataset, only
one-twentieth of the frames are used, as it fails to give rea-
sonable results with all frames input.
We outperform the concurrent work Spann3R [61],
demonstrating the effectiveness of our hierarchical design
with multi-view input and global retrieval. Among clas-
sical SLAM systems, the pose errors of GO-SLAM [75]
and DROID-SLAM [56] are lower than those of NICER-
12

<!-- page 13 -->
SLAM. However, their reconstruction accuracy and com-
pleteness are worse. This discrepancy between pose and
reconstruction errors indicates that effective end-to-end 3D
reconstruction is possible and promising without first ob-
taining precise camera poses.
D. More visual results
Visualization of incremental reconstruction.
Figure 7
visualizes the process of our incremental reconstruction on
two scenes from Replica [54]. Our method achieves effec-
tive alignment at loops while experiencing minimal cumu-
lative drift, without offline global optimization step.
Reconstruction on DTU [1] dataset.
The results are
shown in Figure 8. Note that our method does not require
any camera parameters, and produces dense point cloud re-
constructions end-to-end in real-time.
References
[1] Henrik Aanæs, Rasmus Ramsbøl Jensen, George Vogiatzis,
Engin Tola, and Anders Bjorholm Dahl. Large-scale data for
multiple-view stereopsis. International Journal of Computer
Vision, 120:153–168, 2016. 2, 10, 13
[2] Eduardo Arnold, Jamie Wynn, Sara Vicente, Guillermo
Garcia-Hernando, Aron Monszpart, Victor Prisacariu, Dani-
yar Turmukhambetov, and Eric Brachmann. Map-free visual
relocalization: Metric pose relative to a single image.
In
European Conference on Computer Vision, pages 690–708.
Springer, 2022. 7, 8
[3] Armen Avetisyan, Christopher Xie, Henry Howard-Jenkins,
Tsun-Yi Yang, Samir Aroudj, Suvam Patra, Fuyang Zhang,
Duncan Frost, Luke Holland, Campbell Orme, et al. Scene-
script: Reconstructing scenes with an autoregressive struc-
tured language model.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.13064,
2024. 6, 9
[4] Tim Bailey and Hugh Durrant-Whyte. Simultaneous local-
ization and mapping (slam): Part ii. IEEE robotics & au-
tomation magazine, 13(3):108–117, 2006. 2
[5] Michael Bloesch, Jan Czarnowski, Ronald Clark, Stefan
Leutenegger, and Andrew J Davison. Codeslam—learning
a compact, optimisable representation for dense visual slam.
In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, pages 2560–2568, 2018. 1, 2
[6] G Bradski. The opencv library. Dr. Dobb’s Journal of Soft-
ware Tools, 2000. 8
[7] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J G´omez Rodr´ıguez,
Jos´e MM Montiel, and Juan D Tard´os. Orb-slam3: An accu-
rate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and mul-
timap slam. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 37(6):1874–
1890, 2021. 1, 2
[8] Yiyang Chen, Siyan Dong, Xulong Wang, Lulu Cai, Youyi
Zheng, and Yanchao Yang.
Sg-nerf: Neural surface re-
construction with scene graph optimization. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.12667, 2024. 2
[9] Chi-Ming Chung, Yang-Che Tseng, Ya-Ching Hsu, Xiang-
Qian Shi, Yun-Hung Hua, Jia-Fong Yeh, Wen-Chin Chen,
Yi-Ting Chen, and Winston H Hsu. Orbeez-slam: A real-
time monocular visual slam with orb features and nerf-
realized mapping.
In 2023 IEEE International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 9400–9406.
IEEE, 2023. 1, 2
[10] Jan Czarnowski, Tristan Laidlow, Ronald Clark, and An-
drew J Davison. Deepfactors: Real-time probabilistic dense
monocular slam. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 5
(2):721–728, 2020. 1
[11] Angela Dai, Angel X Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Hal-
ber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. Scannet:
Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor scenes.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, pages 5828–5839, 2017. 2, 12
[12] Pinxuan Dai, Jiamin Xu, Wenxiang Xie, Xinguo Liu,
Huamin Wang, and Weiwei Xu. High-quality surface recon-
struction using gaussian surfels. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024
Conference Papers, pages 1–11, 2024. 2
[13] Alexey Dosovitskiy.
An image is worth 16x16 words:
Transformers for image recognition at scale. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2010.11929, 2020. 3
[14] Bardienus Duisterhof, Lojze Zust, Philippe Weinzaepfel,
Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, and Jerome Revaud. Mast3r-
sfm: a fully-integrated solution for unconstrained structure-
from-motion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.19152, 2024. 3
[15] Hugh Durrant-Whyte and Tim Bailey. Simultaneous local-
ization and mapping: part i. IEEE robotics & automation
magazine, 13(2):99–110, 2006. 2
[16] Jakob Engel, Thomas Sch¨ops, and Daniel Cremers.
Lsd-
slam: Large-scale direct monocular slam. In European con-
ference on computer vision, pages 834–849. Springer, 2014.
1, 2
[17] Jakob Engel, Vladlen Koltun, and Daniel Cremers. Direct
sparse odometry. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence, 40(3):611–625, 2017. 1, 2
[18] Yasutaka Furukawa, Carlos Hern´andez, et al.
Multi-view
stereo: A tutorial. Foundations and Trends® in Computer
Graphics and Vision, 9(1-2):1–148, 2015. 1, 2
[19] Antoine Gu´edon and Vincent Lepetit.
Sugar:
Surface-
aligned gaussian splatting for efficient 3d mesh reconstruc-
tion and high-quality mesh rendering.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 5354–5363, 2024. 2
[20] Binbin Huang, Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Andreas Geiger, and
Shenghua Gao. 2d gaussian splatting for geometrically ac-
curate radiance fields. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference
Papers, pages 1–11, 2024. 2
[21] Huajian Huang, Longwei Li, Hui Cheng, and Sai-Kit Yeung.
Photo-slam: Real-time simultaneous localization and photo-
realistic mapping for monocular stereo and rgb-d cameras.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 21584–21593, 2024.
2
[22] Jiahui Huang, Shi-Sheng Huang, Haoxuan Song, and Shi-
Min Hu. Di-fusion: Online implicit 3d reconstruction with
13

<!-- page 14 -->
deep priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 8932–
8941, 2021. 1, 2
[23] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula,
Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan, and
Jonathon Luiten. Splatam: Splat track & map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
21357–21366, 2024. 2
[24] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Trans. Graph., 42(4):139–1,
2023. 1
[25] Georg Klein and David Murray. Parallel tracking and map-
ping on a camera phone. In 2009 8th IEEE International
Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, pages 83–86.
IEEE, 2009. 1, 2
[26] Arno Knapitsch, Jaesik Park, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen
Koltun. Tanks and temples: Benchmarking large-scale scene
reconstruction. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36
(4):1–13, 2017. 7, 8, 12
[27] Lukas Koestler, Nan Yang, Niclas Zeller, and Daniel Cre-
mers. Tandem: Tracking and dense mapping in real-time us-
ing deep multi-view stereo. In Conference on Robot Learn-
ing, pages 34–45. PMLR, 2022. 2
[28] Vincent Leroy, Yohann Cabon, and J´erˆome Revaud. Ground-
ing image matching in 3d with mast3r.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.09756, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 7, 10, 11, 12
[29] Heng Li, Xiaodong Gu, Weihao Yuan, Luwei Yang, Zilong
Dong, and Ping Tan. Dense rgb slam with neural implicit
maps.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on
Learning Representations, 2023. 1, 2, 6, 7, 11
[30] Zhaoshuo Li, Thomas M¨uller, Alex Evans, Russell H Tay-
lor, Mathias Unberath, Ming-Yu Liu, and Chen-Hsuan Lin.
Neuralangelo: High-fidelity neural surface reconstruction. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pages 8456–8465, 2023. 2
[31] Philipp Lindenberger, Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Viktor Lars-
son, and Marc Pollefeys.
Pixel-perfect structure-from-
motion with featuremetric refinement.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
pages 5987–5997, 2021. 1, 2
[32] Lorenzo Liso,
Erik Sandstr¨om,
Vladimir Yugay,
Luc
Van Gool, and Martin R Oswald. Loopy-slam: Dense neural
slam with loop closures. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 20363–20373, 2024. 2
[33] Shaohui Liu, Yifan Yu, R´emi Pautrat, Marc Pollefeys, and
Viktor Larsson. 3d line mapping revisited. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 21445–21455, 2023. 1, 2
[34] Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul HJ Kelly, and An-
drew J Davison. Gaussian splatting slam. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pages 18039–18048, 2024. 2
[35] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Rodrigo Ortiz-Cayon,
Nima Khademi Kalantari, Ravi Ramamoorthi, Ren Ng, and
Abhishek Kar. Local light field fusion: Practical view syn-
thesis with prescriptive sampling guidelines. ACM Transac-
tions on Graphics (ToG), 38(4):1–14, 2019. 7, 8
[36] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021. 1,
2
[37] Raul Mur-Artal and Juan D Tard´os. Orb-slam2: An open-
source slam system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cam-
eras. IEEE transactions on robotics, 33(5):1255–1262, 2017.
1, 2
[38] Raul Mur-Artal, Jose Maria Martinez Montiel, and Juan D
Tardos. Orb-slam: a versatile and accurate monocular slam
system. IEEE transactions on robotics, 31(5):1147–1163,
2015. 1, 2
[39] Richard A Newcombe, Steven J Lovegrove, and Andrew J
Davison. Dtam: Dense tracking and mapping in real-time.
In 2011 international conference on computer vision, pages
2320–2327. IEEE, 2011. 1, 2
[40] Songyou Peng, Michael Niemeyer, Lars Mescheder, Marc
Pollefeys, and Andreas Geiger.
Convolutional occupancy
networks. In Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceed-
ings, Part III 16, pages 523–540. Springer, 2020. 1
[41] Jeremy Reizenstein, Roman Shapovalov, Philipp Henzler,
Luca Sbordone, Patrick Labatut, and David Novotny. Com-
mon objects in 3d:
Large-scale learning and evaluation
of real-life 3d category reconstruction.
In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision,
pages 10901–10911, 2021. 6, 9
[42] Antoni Rosinol, John J Leonard, and Luca Carlone. Nerf-
slam: Real-time dense monocular slam with neural radiance
fields. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-
ligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 3437–3444. IEEE,
2023. 1, 2
[43] Szymon Rusinkiewicz and Marc Levoy. Efficient variants of
the icp algorithm. In Proceedings third international confer-
ence on 3-D digital imaging and modeling, pages 145–152.
IEEE, 2001. 7, 8
[44] Erik Sandstr¨om, Yue Li, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R Os-
wald. Point-slam: Dense neural point cloud-based slam. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, pages 18433–18444, 2023. 2
[45] Erik Sandstr¨om, Kevin Ta, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R Os-
wald.
Uncle-slam: Uncertainty learning for dense neural
slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 4537–4548, 2023. 2
[46] Erik Sandstr¨om, Keisuke Tateno, Michael Oechsle, Michael
Niemeyer, Luc Van Gool, Martin R Oswald, and Federico
Tombari. Splat-slam: Globally optimized rgb-only slam with
3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16544, 2024. 1, 2
[47] Johannes L Schonberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-
from-motion revisited.
In Proceedings of the IEEE con-
ference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
4104–4113, 2016. 1, 2, 9
[48] Johannes L Sch¨onberger,
Enliang Zheng,
Jan-Michael
Frahm, and Marc Pollefeys.
Pixelwise view selection for
14

<!-- page 15 -->
unstructured multi-view stereo. In Computer Vision–ECCV
2016: 14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Nether-
lands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceedings, Part III 14, pages
501–518. Springer, 2016. 1, 2
[49] Thomas Schops, Johannes L Schonberger, Silvano Galliani,
Torsten Sattler, Konrad Schindler, Marc Pollefeys, and An-
dreas Geiger.
A multi-view stereo benchmark with high-
resolution images and multi-camera videos.
In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, pages 3260–3269, 2017. 7, 8
[50] Thomas Schops, Torsten Sattler, and Marc Pollefeys. Bad
slam: Bundle adjusted direct rgb-d slam. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 134–144, 2019. 7, 8, 12
[51] Jamie Shotton, Ben Glocker, Christopher Zach, Shahram
Izadi, Antonio Criminisi, and Andrew Fitzgibbon. Scene co-
ordinate regression forests for camera relocalization in rgb-d
images. In Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pages 2930–2937, 2013. 6,
7, 8, 11, 12
[52] Brandon Smart, Chuanxia Zheng, Iro Laina, and Vic-
tor Adrian Prisacariu.
Splatt3r: Zero-shot gaussian splat-
ting from uncalibarated image pairs.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.13912, 2024. 2
[53] Noah Snavely, Steven M Seitz, and Richard Szeliski. Photo
tourism: exploring photo collections in 3d. In ACM siggraph
2006 papers, pages 835–846. 2006. 1, 2
[54] Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik
Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J. Engel, Raul Mur-Artal,
Carl Ren, Shobhit Verma, Anton Clarkson, Mingfei Yan,
Brian Budge, Yajie Yan, Xiaqing Pan, June Yon, Yuyang
Zou, Kimberly Leon, Nigel Carter, Jesus Briales, Tyler
Gillingham, Elias Mueggler, Luis Pesqueira, Manolis Savva,
Dhruv Batra, Hauke M. Strasdat, Renzo De Nardi, Michael
Goesele, Steven Lovegrove, and Richard Newcombe. The
Replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor spaces. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019. 6, 7, 8, 10, 11, 12, 13
[55] Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J Davi-
son. imap: Implicit mapping and positioning in real-time. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on
computer vision, pages 6229–6238, 2021. 1, 2
[56] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Droid-slam: Deep visual slam
for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems, 34:16558–16569, 2021.
1, 2, 6, 7, 11, 12
[57] Fabio Tosi, Youmin Zhang, Ziren Gong, Erik Sandstr¨om,
Stefano Mattoccia, Martin R Oswald, and Matteo Poggi.
How nerfs and 3d gaussian splatting are reshaping slam: a
survey. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13255, 4, 2024. 1
[58] Shinji Umeyama. Least-squares estimation of transforma-
tion parameters between two point patterns. IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence, 13(04):
376–380, 1991. 7, 8
[59] Jeffrey S Vitter. Random sampling with a reservoir. ACM
Transactions on Mathematical Software (TOMS), 11(1):37–
57, 1985. 5
[60] Fangjinhua Wang, Silvano Galliani, Christoph Vogel, and
Marc Pollefeys. Itermvs: Iterative probability estimation for
efficient multi-view stereo. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
pages 8606–8615, 2022. 1, 2
[61] Hengyi Wang and Lourdes Agapito. 3d reconstruction with
spatial memory. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.16061, 2024. 2,
3, 6, 7, 11, 12
[62] Peng Wang, Lingjie Liu, Yuan Liu, Christian Theobalt, Taku
Komura, and Wenping Wang. Neus: Learning neural implicit
surfaces by volume rendering for multi-view reconstruction.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10689, 2021. 1, 2
[63] Ruicheng Wang, Sicheng Xu, Cassie Dai, Jianfeng Xiang,
Yu Deng, Xin Tong, and Jiaolong Yang. Moge: Unlocking
accurate monocular geometry estimation for open-domain
images with optimal training supervision.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.19115, 2024. 2
[64] Shuzhe Wang,
Vincent Leroy,
Yohann Cabon,
Boris
Chidlovskii, and Jerome Revaud. Dust3r: Geometric 3d vi-
sion made easy. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 20697–
20709, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 4, 6, 7, 8, 9, 11, 12
[65] Yiming Wang, Qin Han, Marc Habermann, Kostas Dani-
ilidis, Christian Theobalt, and Lingjie Liu.
Neus2: Fast
learning of neural implicit surfaces for multi-view recon-
struction.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3295–3306, 2023. 2
[66] Changchang Wu. Visualsfm: A visual structure from motion
system. http://www. cs. washington. edu/homes/ccwu/vsfm,
2011. 1, 2
[67] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dan Xu, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong
Wang, and Xuelong Li. Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d
gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages
19595–19604, 2024. 2
[68] Yao Yao, Zixin Luo, Shiwei Li, Tian Fang, and Long Quan.
Mvsnet: Depth inference for unstructured multi-view stereo.
In Proceedings of the European conference on computer vi-
sion (ECCV), pages 767–783, 2018. 1, 2
[69] Yao Yao, Zixin Luo, Shiwei Li, Jingyang Zhang, Yufan Ren,
Lei Zhou, Tian Fang, and Long Quan. Blendedmvs: A large-
scale dataset for generalized multi-view stereo networks. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition, pages 1790–1799, 2020. 7, 8
[70] Botao Ye, Sifei Liu, Haofei Xu, Xueting Li, Marc Pollefeys,
Ming-Hsuan Yang, and Songyou Peng. No pose, no problem:
Surprisingly simple 3d gaussian splats from sparse unposed
images. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.24207, 2024. 2
[71] Chandan Yeshwanth, Yueh-Cheng Liu, Matthias Nießner,
and Angela Dai. Scannet++: A high-fidelity dataset of 3d in-
door scenes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 12–22, 2023. 6, 9
[72] Vladimir Yugay, Yue Li, Theo Gevers, and Martin R Os-
wald. Gaussian-slam: Photo-realistic dense slam with gaus-
sian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10070, 2023. 2
[73] Ganlin Zhang, Erik Sandstr¨om, Youmin Zhang, Manthan Pa-
tel, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R Oswald. Glorie-slam: Glob-
ally optimized rgb-only implicit encoding point cloud slam.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.19549, 2024. 1, 2
15

<!-- page 16 -->
[74] Junyi Zhang, Charles Herrmann, Junhwa Hur, Varun Jam-
pani, Trevor Darrell, Forrester Cole, Deqing Sun, and Ming-
Hsuan Yang.
Monst3r: A simple approach for estimat-
ing geometry in the presence of motion.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.03825, 2024. 2
[75] Youmin Zhang, Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia, and Matteo
Poggi. Go-slam: Global optimization for consistent 3d in-
stant reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3727–3737,
2023. 1, 2, 6, 7, 11, 12
[76] Huizhong Zhou, Benjamin Ummenhofer, and Thomas Brox.
Deeptam: Deep tracking and mapping. In Proceedings of
the European conference on computer vision (ECCV), pages
822–838, 2018. 1, 2
[77] Heng Zhou, Zhetao Guo, Shuhong Liu, Lechen Zhang,
Qihao Wang, Yuxiang Ren, and Mingrui Li.
Mod-slam:
Monocular dense mapping for unbounded 3d scene recon-
struction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.03762, 2024. 1, 2
[78] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hu-
jun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and Marc Polle-
feys. Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition, pages 12786–12796, 2022. 1,
2
[79] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Zhaopeng Cui,
Martin R Oswald, Andreas Geiger, and Marc Pollefeys.
Nicer-slam: Neural implicit scene encoding for rgb slam. In
2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages
42–52. IEEE, 2024. 1, 2, 6, 7, 8, 11
16
