<!-- page 1 -->
OpenGS-SLAM: Open-Set Dense Semantic SLAM with 3D Gaussian
Splatting for Object-Level Scene Understanding
Dianyi Yang1,2, Yu Gao1,2, Xihan Wang1,2, Yufeng Yue1,2, Yi Yang∗,1,2, Mengyin Fu1,2
Abstract— Recent advancements in 3D Gaussian Splatting
have significantly improved the efficiency and quality of dense
semantic SLAM. However, previous methods are generally
constrained by limited-category pre-trained classifiers and im-
plicit semantic representation, which hinder their performance
in open-set scenarios and restrict 3D object-level scene un-
derstanding. To address these issues, we propose OpenGS-
SLAM, an innovative framework that utilizes 3D Gaussian
representation to perform dense semantic SLAM in open-set
environments. Our system integrates explicit semantic labels
derived from 2D foundational models into the 3D Gaussian
framework, facilitating robust 3D object-level scene under-
standing. We introduce Gaussian Voting Splatting to enable
fast 2D label map rendering and scene updating. Additionally,
we propose a Confidence-based 2D Label Consensus method to
ensure consistent labeling across multiple views. Furthermore,
we employ a Segmentation Counter Pruning strategy to improve
the accuracy of semantic scene representation. Extensive exper-
iments on both synthetic and real-world datasets demonstrate
the effectiveness of our method in scene understanding, track-
ing, and mapping, achieving 10× faster semantic rendering and
2× lower storage costs compared to existing methods. Project
page: https://young-bit.github.io/opengs-github.github.io/.
I. INTRODUCTION
Dense semantic Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) is a fundamental challenge in robotics [1], [2] and
embodied intelligence [3], [4]. It integrates semantic under-
standing of the environment into 3D scene reconstruction and
estimates camera pose simultaneously. Traditional semantic
SLAM struggles with predicting unknown areas and requires
significant map storage [5]. While NeRF-based methods [6]–
[9] mitigated these issues, they still suffer from inefficient
per-pixel raycasting rendering [10].
Alternative to NeRFs, the recently emerged 3D Gaussian
Splatting (3DGS) [11] has shown remarkable reconstruction
quality with high training and rendering efficiency. Following
these advantages, 3DGS-based Semantic SLAM methods
[12], [13] are developed to achieve high-quality semantic
mapping. These methods embed 2D semantic features into
3DGS representation, where each Gaussian is enhanced with
an N-channel feature embedding.
However, these methods often rely on pre-trained clas-
sifiers with a limited number of categories to produce 2D
segmentation results, which limits their effectiveness in open-
set scenarios. Further, since all semantic information is
*This work was partly supported by National Key R&D Program of
China (2022YFC2603600) and National Natural Science Foundation of
China (Grant No. NSFC 62233002)
1School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
2National Key Lab of Autonomous Intelligent Unmanned Systems,
Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China
*Corresponding author: Y. Yang Email: yang yi@bit.edu.cn
Fig. 1: Compared to the feature-embedded methods [12],
[13], our approach integrates semantic labels into the 3D
Gaussian scene representation, ensuring that Gaussians be-
longing to the same object are consistently labeled. This en-
ables more effective 3D object-level scene understanding and
interaction. By leveraging 2D foundational vision models,
our approach facilitates open-set dense semantic SLAM. The
images on the left are from [12].
implicitly stored within the feature-embedded representation,
it becomes challenging to directly access the semantic label
of each Gaussian. This makes them incompatible with em-
bodied intelligence that necessitates 3D object-level scene
understanding and interaction.
To address these limitations and extend semantic SLAM
to open-set scenarios, we propose OpenGS-SLAM, a novel
framework that incorporates 2D foundational vision models
and assigns an explicit semantic label to each Gaussian,
while enabling online semantic mapping. The foundational
model in this framework is easily customizable; for example,
it can be replaced with SAM [14] or MobileSAMv2 [15] to
ensure flexibility. Additionally, the framework can map se-
mantic labels generated by these models into 3D Gaussians,
facilitating its application in open-set scenarios. By assigning
an explicit semantic label to each Gaussian, the framework
efficiently supports 3D object-level scene understanding.
During the development of this framework, we faced three
major challenges: 1) the non-differentiable nature of the
semantic label attribute prevents us from using 3DGS raster-
ization for fast label map rendering and scene updating; 2)
inconsistencies in SAM’s results across multiple views cause
the same object to receive varying labels or be segmented
into parts or wholes; and 3) during training, Gaussians in
regions with less view constraint may expand significantly,
resulting in inaccurate segmentation.
Focusing on these challenges, 1) we introduce Gaussian
arXiv:2503.01646v1  [cs.CV]  3 Mar 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
Voting Splatting (GS Voting) to facilitate rapid 2D label map
rendering and scene updating. 2) To achieve consistent seg-
mentation and efficiently incorporate new semantic informa-
tion into the scene, we propose a Confidence-based 2D Label
Consensus method. 3) We propose a Segmentation Counter
Pruning strategy to achieve more accurate segmentation of
the scene. Additionally, we designed an ensemble semantic
information generator to produce 2D semantic labels.
To summarize, our contributions are as follows:
• We propose OpenGS-SLAM, which enables open-set se-
mantic SLAM based on 3D Gaussian Splatting. It supports
a wide range of off-the-shelf 2D foundational vision mod-
els without extra training.
• We propose a novel semantic 3DGS representation with
the Gaussian Voting Splatting method, which enables 3D
object-level scene understanding with 10× faster rendering
from novel views, 2× lower storage costs and more accu-
rate semantic segmentation compared to other methods.
• Our method achieves competitive performance in both
synthetic and real-world scenarios in terms of tracking,
mapping, and scene understanding.
II. RELATED WORK
Gaussian Splatting based RGB-D SLAM. 3D Gaus-
sian Splatting [11] revolutionized SLAM by enabling high-
fidelity scene reconstruction and precise pose estimation.
Notable advances include SplaTAM [10] with silhouette-
guided optimization, GS-SLAM’s [16] adaptive Gaussian
expansion, and GS-ICP SLAM’s G-ICP for accurate pose
tracking. Additionally, 3DGS has been extended for semantic
scene understanding, with methods like SGS-SLAM [17]
incorporating 2D semantic priors. SemGauss-SLAM [12] and
NEDS-SLAM [13] further optimize memory usage through
embedding low-dimensional semantic vectors into the 3D
Gaussian framework. However, the reliance on auxiliary
classifiers or lightweight encoders for 2D segmentation limits
their performance in open-set scenarios.
2D Foundation Vision Models. These methods are de-
signed to capture broad knowledge from large-scale data
and perform zero-shot tasks on unseen data. The Recog-
nize Anything Model [18] can generate open-set classes
from images. Segment Anything [14] excels in zero-shot
segmentation, with advancements like MobileSAMv2 [15]
achieving over 20 fps in full-scene segmentation. SAM2.0
[19] extends to real-time video segmentation but struggles
with new object detection and multi-object tracking. Methods
like Yolo-world [20] and Grounding Dino [21] enable zero-
shot object detection. Some approaches [22], [23] integrate
these models for zero-shot semantic segmentation.
Open-World 3DGS Scene Understanding Method. Re-
cent methods in this field focus on lifting information from
2D foundation models to build 3D representations in an
offline manner. For instance, LangSplat [24], Language-
Embedded [25], and Feature-3DGS [26] leverage CLIP [27]
and SAM [14] for 2D pixel-level understanding. In contrast,
GS-Grouping [28] and OpenGaussian [29] elevate SAM’s
2D segmentation for 3D segmentation, with GS-Grouping
using DEVA [30] to resolve frame-to-frame inconsistencies.
However, these methods rely on time-consuming processes,
limiting their applicability for online reconstruction.
III. METHOD
A. Ensemble Semantic Information Generator
To fully exploit the capabilities of existing 2D foundational
models in open-set scenarios, we integrate three types of
expert models designed for specific contexts. The input
RGB images are first fed into a Recognize Anything Model
(RAM) [18] and a SAM model. The RAM generates open-
set classes information, which serves as a text prompt for
the Detection Model (using YOLO-World [20]) to produce
semantic bounding boxes and detection scores. The SAM
model outputs a label map with confidence scores, though the
labels are randomly assigned. For each label, we match the
bounding box with the highest IoU (above 0.5) to establish
semantic correspondence, which is recorded in an input
Label-Class Table MI
LC. We also maintain a global Label-
Class Table MG
LC throughout the SLAM process. For labels
without a matching semantic bounding box, we assign them
to the None class with a detection score of 0.0. The expert
models are customizable; for instance, we test SAM1.0 [14]
and MobileSAMv2 [15] in the experimental section to assess
their performance and adaptability in various scenarios. No-
tably, the categories in these tables are not predefined; they
begin from an empty set and can expand dynamically during
the SLAM process.
B. Semantic Gaussian Mapping
In this section, we first introduce our scene representation
strategy. Next, we explain how to render both RGB-D images
and label maps using Gaussian Voting Splatting. Finally, we
describe the process of scene densification and updating.
3D Gaussian strategy. We employ a set of Gaussians
with novel designed properties for scene representation.
Compared with all previous methods, we replaced the feature
embeddings in each Gaussian with a one-dimensional, non-
differentiable attribute named GS Label. Specifically, each
Gaussian includes a 3D center position x, covariance Σ,
opacity o, color f, and label ℓ.
Gaussian Voting Splatting. This method combines the
strengths of 3D Gaussian Splatting and our semantic 3DGS
scene representation to achieve high-fidelity RGB-D ren-
dering alongside precise semantic mapping. First, with the
optimized 3D Gaussian scene representation, each Gaussian
is projected from 3D space onto the 2D image plane using
the camera pose T = {R, t}. The covariance matrix Σ is
transformed to the 2D plane as:
Σ′ = JT −1ΣT −T JT ,
(1)
where J represents the Jacobian of the projection function.
Second, the Gaussians are sorted by depth and rendered using
front-to-back alpha compositing. The pixel color C(p) and
depth D(p) are calculated through α-blending, as denoted
in Eq.2, where fi and di denote the color and depth of the

<!-- page 3 -->
Fig. 2: An overview of OpenGS-SLAM. Our method takes an RGB-D stream as input. RGB images are first processed by
the Semantic Information Generator and G-ICP to extract semantic information and estimate the current pose. Using this
pose, we perform precise and efficient semantic rendering via Gaussian Voting Splatting. We then unify the input label map
with the current map through Confidence-based 2D Label Consensus, ensuring semantic consistency. During this process,
partial Gaussian data is updated, and counter Gaussians are pruned.
i-th Gaussian, respectively, and αi is the opacity-weighted
density, derived from the 2D covariance Σ′ and opacity oi.













C(p) =
X
i∈N
fiαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj),
D(p) =
X
i∈N
diαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)
(2)
Third, for each pixel p in the final rendered label map,
we aggregate all contributing Gaussians, denoted as Gp, and
apply label-aware α-blending to determine the contribution
of each label. Specifically, let wi
j represent the weight of the
i-th Gaussian gi with label ℓj in Gp, computed as:
wi
j = αi
i−1
Y
k=1
(1 −αk)
(3)
where k refers to the depth-sorted index of Gaussians in Gp.
Defining Gj
p as the set of Gaussians in Gp with ℓj, the total
weight Wj for ℓj is computed as:
Wj =
X
gi∈Gj
p
wi
j.
(4)
The final label assigned to pixel p corresponds to the label
with the highest cumulative weight. This approach ensures
that each pixel is labeled based on the most significant cu-
mulative contribution from the Gaussians, providing accurate
and efficient 2D label map rendering.
Scene Densification and Updating. For densification,
once a frame is identified as a keyframe, we use the covari-
ance computed from G-ICP to initialize the source Gaussians
[16]. After integrating the semantic GS Label attribute, these
Gaussians are added into the map.
For updating, we optimize the differentiable parameters
using a loss function applied to selected frames following
[16]. In contrast, the non-differentiable GS Label is updated
in an explicit manner. During the label map rendering, we
record the top K = 50 Gaussians contributing to each pixel,
generating the matrix GtopK ∈RH×W ×K. If a pixel p
labeled as ℓs in the rendered label map, is updated to ℓt, we
utilize GtopK to identify the Gaussians previously labeled as
ℓs that contribute to pixel p and update their label to ℓt. This
approach ensures efficient and precise updates of semantic
labels across the scene.
C. Confidence-based 2D Label Concensus
Currently, models like MobileSAMv2 [15] that support
real-time full-scene segmentation struggle with multi-view
inconsistencies, where the same object can end up with
different labels or be segmented into parts/whole across
different viewpoints. Most existing methods address this
through additional tracking models [28] or global maps [26],
[31], limiting their real-time applicability. Therefore, we
propose a Confidence-based 2D Label Consensus method,
leveraging the efficient 3DGS scene rendering to unify input
semantic information with the current map on-the-fly.
We define Ls = {ℓi
s}M
i=1 as the set of labels in the input
label map, with Cs representing the confidence of each label.
Similarly, Lr = {ℓj
r}N
j=1 denotes the set of labels in the
rendered label map from the current viewpoint, with Cr as the
corresponding confidence. Additionally, we define |ℓ| as the
number of pixels associated with label ℓin its respective label
map. Our goal is to achieve label consensus by matching
all labels in Ls with those in Lr, or creating new labels if
necessary. The final output is a Consistent Input Label Map
that provides consistent semantic information.
For any ℓi
s ∈Ls and ℓj
r ∈Lr, we identify four possible
relationships based on their | · | in the label map, as shown
in Fig.2, where we set three threshold as τ1, τ2, τ3.
• Full Match: If ℓi
s fully matches ℓj
r, we update the label in
Ls from ℓi
s to ℓj
r and set Cj
r to the maximum of its current

<!-- page 4 -->
value and Ci
s.
• Partial Match: We define Pj
s ∈Ls as all part labels
that partially matches to ℓj
r. We then calculate their area-
weighted average confidence ¯Cs, computed as:
¯Cs =
P
ℓis∈Pj
s Ci
s × |ℓi
s|
P
ℓis∈Pj
s |ℓis|
(5)
If Cj
r
>
¯Cs, we update all part labels in Pj
s to ℓj
r.
Otherwise, new label categories are assigned to those ℓi
s
whose Ci
s > Cj
r. For each new label assignment ℓi
s →
ℓt, we search the corresponding region in GtopK for all
Gaussians with ℓj
r, and update their labels to ℓt.
• Whole Match: This is similar to the Partial Match, but
the new part labels come from Lr. The same comparison
process applies.
• New: If ℓi
s cannot be matched with any label in Lr, we
assign a new label to this region.
For other cases, we set the labels from ℓi
s to the back-
ground label (e.g., 0). The Full Match is prioritized over
other types of matches as it ensures the highest level of
consistency.
After label consensus process, we obtain the updated
label mapping ℓs →ℓt for all labels in Ls, and use it to
generate the Consistent Input Label Map. We then update
the global Label-Class table MG
LC based on this mapping
and the inpu MI
LC. To enhance consensus accuracy, we also
introduce two modules: Input Confidence Update and Part
Label Decay.
Input Confidence Update. To avoid incorrect updates of
partially visible objects, before label consensus, we update
the input confidence Cs based on object completeness in
the current view. Using the input label map and Cs, we
derive the Input Confidence Map Is ∈RH×W . During GS
Voting, the completeness of each ℓj
r ∈Lt is calculated as
the ratio of visible Gaussians in the current view to the total
number in the map. We then calculate the coverage ratio
map Covr ∈RH×W from the rendered label map. Next,
we perform element-wise multiplication between Covr and
Is to obtain the Integrated Confidence Map. The updated
confidence Ci
s for each ℓi
s is the average of the corresponding
values in the Integrated Confidence Map.
Part Label Decay. Several studies [32]–[34] have found
that SAM often over-segments objects, which means that a
whole object tends to be split into multiple parts. Therefore,
we propose a decay mechanism for label confidence. Specif-
ically, whenever a label in a scene is identified as a part
label, its confidence is reduced by δ. This decay ensures that
over-segmented labels will be correctly updated over multiple
accurate observations.
D. Segmentation Counter Pruning
We observe that in regions with less view constraint,
Gaussians can grow excessively large during optimization.
This not only prevents the introduction of new Gaussians but
also results in inaccurate segmentation. To address this, we
propose a Segmentation Counter Pruning method. For fully
Fig. 3: Effect of Segmentation Counter Pruning. Left: We
select a region with less view constraint throughout the
SLAM process. Right: Rendered results from new viewpoints
with and without the Segmentation Counter Pruning in this
region.
matched labels ℓi
s and ℓj
r obtained from the label consensus
process, we collect all pixels in the symmetric difference
between their respective label maps, denoted as S. Using
GtopK, we identify Gaussians in S with ℓj
r as Counter
Gaussians. If their scale in any direction exceeds a threshold
θ, they are pruned. This method improves segmentation
accuracy and allows for the introduction of new Gaussians
that better capture the spatial structure, as shown in Fig.3.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
Given a real-time RGB-D video stream, our method incre-
mentally fuses 2D semantic information from the 2D foun-
dation models to construct a semantic 3D Gaussian scene
representation and tracks itself within the scene. Notably, our
method does not require any predefined semantic categories.
To comprehensively evaluate performance, we focus on both
scene understanding and SLAM performance.
For the scene understanding performance, we consider the
following factors:
• Multi-view 2D Segmentation: This metric evaluates the
consistency and accuracy of 2D segmentation across
multiple viewpoints within the scene.
• 3D Object-Level Understanding: This evaluates the ef-
fectiveness of our semantic 3DGS scene representation
in achieving 3D object-level scene understanding.
For the SLAM performance, we assess the model’s camera
tracking accuracy and reconstruction quality.
A. Experimental Setup
Datasets: We evaluate our method on both synthetic and
real-world datasets. For scene understanding, we conduct
quantitative evaluations on 8 synthetic scenes from Replica
[35]. Following other 3DGS-based SLAM methods, we then
assess SLAM performance on the Replica [35] and TUM
[36] datasets.
Baselines: For scene understanding, we first benchmark
against existing Semantic SLAM methods on Replica scenes.
We also evaluate our model’s capability in open-set scenar-
ios by comparing it with offline methods, including GS-
Grouping [28] and Feature 3DGS [26]. For reconstruction
quality and camera tracking, we compare our approach
against Visual SLAM methods, including SplaTAM [10],
GS-SLAM [37], LoopSplat [38] and GICP-SLAM [16], as

<!-- page 5 -->
Fig. 4: Qualitative comparison of novel-view open-set se-
mantic segmentation. For TUM, novel views refer to view-
points that are not included in the training data, and the
ground truth is obtained from manual annotations.
well as Semantic SLAM methods like NIDS-SLAM [8],
DNS-SLAM [9], SNI-SLAM [7], SGS-SLAM [17], NEDS-
SLAM [13] and SemGauss-SLAM [12].
Metrics: To evaluate scene understanding, we report
mIoU(%) and assess pixel-wise segmentation accuracy using
Acc(%). We also measure the frame rate with FPS and
consider the model’s complexity by reporting Learnable
Parameters(MB). For reconstruction quality, we use standard
photometric rendering metrics such as PSNR, SSIM, and
LPIPS. Camera tracking is evaluated using ATE RMSE(cm).
Notably, for FPS, we compare the inference time for both
the RGB and segmentation maps, as the baselines employ
joint rendering.
Implementation Details: Our method is implemented
based on GS-ICP SLAM [16]. We also modified the ras-
terization component in the official 3DGS code [11] to
implement GS Voting Splatting. For the 2D Confidence-
based Label Consensus, we set the thresholds as τ1 = 0.85,
τ2 = 0.9, and τ3 = 0.1, with the confidence decay parameter
δ = 0.06. The pruning thresholds θ for counter Gaussians
are set to 0.10 for Replica and 0.25 for TUM. For the 2D
foundation models, we tested RAM++ [18], Yolo-World(v2-
l) [20], MobileSAMv2 [15], and SAM1(vit-h) [14], following
the default configurations. During experiments, we set the
maximum number of labels assignable per test to 2000.
B. Multi-view 2D Segmentation
We first compare our method to Radiance-Based semantic
SLAM approaches on the Replica dataset, following [7]–
[9], [13], [17], using semantic priors as input to build the
map. As shown in Table I, our model achieves the best
performance in semantic segmentation accuracy. We attribute
this to our superior semantic scene representation, which
integrates explicit semantic information into the 3D Gaussian
representation, enabling more precise semantic mapping.
However, these methods are restricted to close-set scene
understanding. In contrast, recent offline methods like [26],
Fig. 5: Scene manipulation process and results. Left: We se-
lect an object from the scene for removal. Middle: Compared
to GS-Grouping, our model demonstrates more efficient
interactive processing. Right: Our method achieves superior
manipulation results.
[28] demonstrated strong open-set scene understanding ca-
pabilities by using 2D foundation models and incorporating
semantic features into 3DGS representation. We evaluate our
method’s performance in open-set scenarios by comparing it
with these models in zero-shot novel-view semantic segmen-
tation. To ensure fairness, we downsampled keyframe data
from our SLAM process by a factor of 10 as input and trained
the offline models for 6K iterations.
TABLE I: Quantitative comparison of semantic segmentation
accuracy(mIoU↑) against Radiance-Based Semantic SLAM
methods on the Replica [35] datasets. All models use the
ground-truth semantic labels from the replica dataset.
Methods
R0
R1
R2
Of0
Of1
Of2
Of3
Of4
NIDS-SLAM [8]
82.45
84.08
76.99
85.94
-
-
-
-
DNS-SLAM [9]
88.32
84.90
81.20
84.66
-
-
-
-
SNI-SLAM [7]
88.42
87.43
86.16
87.63
78.63
86.49
74.01
80.22
SGS-SLAM [17]
92.95
92.91
92.10
92.90
-
-
-
-
NEDS-SLAM [13]
90.73
91.20
-
90.42
-
-
-
-
Ours(Prior)
93.24
94.11
92.79
93.22
92.16
93.25
93.14
93.77
TABLE II: Comparison of zero-shot novel-view Semantic
Segmentation with 3DGS-based open-set scene understand-
ing methods. (average performance on Replica [35])
Method
mIoU(%) ↑
Acc(%) ↑
Render
FPS ↑
Learnable
Parameters(MB) ↓
Featrue 3DGS [26]
48.89
57.51
11.03
894.91
GS-Grouping [28]
59.15
69.94
16.14
717.12
Ours(MobileSAMv2)
57.48
67.14
164.78
314.11
Ours(SAM1.0)
61.91
73.11
165.47
301.71
As shown in Table II, our method (using SAM1.0) sig-
nificantly outperforms the baselines, with +13% and +3%
mIoU improvements over Feature 3DGS and GS-Grouping,
respectively. Similar improvements are visible in Fig.4. We
attribute this to our efficient 2D Confidence-based Label
Consensus, which integrates globally consistent semantic
information. Moreover, our method uses 2× fewer learnable
parameters by assigning a 1D GS Label to each Gaussian,
unlike other methods that use N-channel semantic features.
Additionally, our method achieves 10× faster rendering
speeds, owing to the efficiency of our GS Voting Splatting
for rapid semantic label map rendering.

<!-- page 6 -->
Fig. 6: Visualized ablation results.
C. 3D Object-Level Scene Understanding
Compared to existing 3DGS-based semantic SLAM meth-
ods, our approach not only generates novel-view segmenta-
tion results but also supports advanced 3D object-level ap-
plications, such as scene manipulation. This includes novel-
view synthesis with 3D objects removed, moved, or rotated,
as well as interactive scene modifications based on user
prompts (e.g., point or bounding box input).
Fig.5 demonstrates that our method achieves more realistic
scene manipulation and more efficient user interaction com-
pared to GS-Grouping [28], due to our advanced semantic
3DGS scene representation.
D. Camera Tracking Accuracy
As illustrated in Table III, our method achieves up to a
51% relative improvement in tracking accuracy compared to
other dense semantic SLAM methods on the Replica dataset.
This improvement is attributed to the integration of the G-
ICP tracking module derived from GICP-SLAM. Addition-
ally, we also achieve the best localization performance on
the TUM dataset, as shown in Table IV. We attribute this
improvement to the Segmentation Counter Pruning strategy,
which enhances scene representation by refining object con-
tours. As a result, the alignment of Gaussian distributions
during the G-ICP process is significantly improved, leading
to superior localization accuracy.
E. Reconstruction Quality
As shown in Table III in the Replica scene, our method
achieves the best performance in PSNR and LPIPS compared
to other dense semantic SLAM and visual SLAM methods.
TABLE III: Camera Tracking and Reconstruction Results on
Replica [35]. (average performance on 8 scenes)
Category
Methods
ATE↓
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
Visual
SLAM
SplaTAM [10]
0.35
33.91
0.969
0.097
GS-SLAM [37]
0.50
34.27
0.975
0.082
LoopSplat [38]
0.26
36.63
0.985
0.112
GICP-SLAM [16]
0.16
38.86
0.976
0.041
Semantic
SLAM
SNI-SLAM [7]
0.46
29.43
0.935
0.235
SGS-SLAM [17]
0.41
34.66
0.973
0.096
NEDS-SLAM [13]
0.35
34.76
0.962
0.088
SemGauss-SLAM [12]
0.33
35.03
0.982
0.062
Ours (SAM1.0)
0.16
39.49
0.978
0.034
TABLE IV: Camera Tracking Results on Tum [36]. ATE.↓
Category
Methods
fr1-desk
fr2-xyz
fr3-office
Avg.
Visual
SLAM
SplaTAM [10]
3.35
1.24
5.16
3.25
GS-SLAM [37]
3.65
-
-
-
LoopSplat [38]
2.08
1.58
3.22
2.29
GICP-SLAM [16]
2.41
1.77
2.67
2.28
Semantic SLAM
Ours (SAM1.0)
2.40
1.57
2.48
2.15
F. Ablation Study.
To better validate our method, we conduct ablation stud-
ies on the Replica datasets. We primarily investigate the
impacts of our proposed Segmentation Counter Pruning in
III-C and the Input Confidence Update, Part Label Decay
in III-D. Using our(SAM1.0) as the baseline, we compare
segmentation performance after removing each module. The
quantitative and qualitative results are presented in Table V
and Fig.6, respectively. 1) Part Label Decay: This module
boosted the segmentation results by 5.96↑mIoU% and 10.2↑
Acc%, as it ensures over-segmented regions are refined after
multiple observations, leading to more compact segmenta-
tion. 2) Confidence Update: This module improved results
with 3.39↑mIoU% and 5.4↑Acc%, as it prevents incorrect
updates for partially observed objects during SLAM. 3) Seg-
mentation Counter Pruning: This module yielded a smaller
improvement of 0.26↑mIoU% and 1.49↑Acc%, since it
primarily refines object boundaries rather than enhancing
overall segmentation performance.
TABLE V: Segmentation Performance comparison of various
settings on Replica [35].
Settings
mIoU(%) ↑
Acc(%) ↑
w/o Segmentation Counter Pruning
62.91
73.02
w/o Input Confidence Update
59.78
69.11
w/o Part Label Decay
57.21
64.31
Ours(SAM1.0)
63.17
74.51
V. CONCLUSIONS
We propose OpenGS-SLAM, a novel framework that uses
3D Gaussian representation for dense semantic SLAM in
open-set scenarios. By integrating semantic labels into the
3D Gaussian model, it enables efficient 3D object-level
understanding and dense semantic mapping. We introduce
Gaussian Voting Splatting for rapid label map rendering
and scene updates. To ensure consistency in multi-view se-
mantic labels from SAM, we propose Confidence-based 2D
Label Consensus. Additionally, we implement Segmentation
Counter Pruning to refine the scene representation. Extensive
experiments show that our approach achieves state-of-the-art
performance in tracking, mapping, and scene understanding.
However, our method is not applicable to dynamic scenes.
In the future, we aim to leverage semantic information to
achieve object-level understanding in dynamic environments.
We also plan to develop a well-annotated large-scale RGB-
D dataset, which includes common and uncommon objects,
to further validate the model’s performance in open-set
environments.

<!-- page 7 -->
REFERENCES
[1] A. Rosinol, M. Abate, Y. Chang, and L. Carlone, “Kimera: an open-
source library for real-time metric-semantic localization and mapping,”
in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 1689–1696, IEEE, 2020.
[2] J. McCormac, A. Handa, A. Davison, and S. Leutenegger, “Se-
manticfusion: Dense 3d semantic mapping with convolutional neural
networks,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pp. 4628–4635, IEEE, 2017.
[3] T. Zhang, X. Hu, J. Xiao, and G. Zhang, “A survey of visual
navigation: From geometry to embodied ai,” Engineering Applications
of Artificial Intelligence, vol. 114, p. 105036, 2022.
[4] Z. Jia, K. Lin, Y. Zhao, et al., “Learning to act with affordance-aware
multimodal neural slam,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 5877–5884, IEEE, 2022.
[5] Z. Liu, F. Milano, J. Frey, R. Siegwart, H. Blum, and C. Cadena, “Un-
supervised continual semantic adaptation through neural rendering,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 3031–3040, 2023.
[6] K. Mazur, E. Sucar, and A. J. Davison, “Feature-realistic neural fusion
for real-time, open set scene understanding,” in 2023 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 8201–
8207, IEEE, 2023.
[7] S. Zhu, G. Wang, H. Blum, J. Liu, L. Song, M. Pollefeys, and H. Wang,
“Sni-slam: Semantic neural implicit slam,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 21167–21177, 2024.
[8] Y. Haghighi, S. Kumar, J. P. Thiran, and L. Van Gool, “Neural implicit
dense semantic slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2304.14560, 2023.
[9] K. Li, M. Niemeyer, N. Navab, and F. Tombari, “Dns slam: Dense
neural semantic-informed slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.00204,
2023.
[10] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, “Splatam: Splat, track & map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
[11] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.,” ACM Trans. Graph.,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023.
[12] S. Zhu, R. Qin, G. Wang, J. Liu, and H. Wang, “Semgaussslam: Dense
semantic gaussian splatting slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07494,
2024.
[13] Y. Ji, Y. Liu, G. Xie, B. Ma, and Z. Xie, “Neds-slam: A novel neural
explicit dense semantic slam framework using 3d gaussian splatting,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11679, 2024.
[14] A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson,
T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C. Berg, W.-Y. Lo, et al., “Segment
anything,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pp. 4015–4026, 2023.
[15] C. Zhang, D. Han, S. Zheng, J. Choi, T.-H. Kim, and C. S. Hong,
“Mobilesamv2: Faster segment anything to everything,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.09579, 2023.
[16] S. Ha, J. Yeon, and H. Yu, “Rgbd gs-icp slam,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.12550, 2024.
[17] M. Li, S. Liu, and H. Zhou, “Sgs-slam: Semantic gaussian splatting
for neural dense slam,” 2024.
[18] X. Huang, Y.-J. Huang, Y. Zhang, W. Tian, R. Feng, Y. Zhang, Y. Xie,
Y. Li, and L. Zhang, “Inject semantic concepts into image tagging for
open-set recognition,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.15200, 2023.
[19] N. Ravi, V. Gabeur, Y.-T. Hu, R. Hu, C. Ryali, T. Ma, H. Khedr,
R. R¨adle, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, et al., “Sam 2: Segment anything
in images and videos,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714, 2024.
[20] T. Cheng, L. Song, Y. Ge, W. Liu, X. Wang, and Y. Shan, “Yolo-world:
Real-time open-vocabulary object detection,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 16901–16911, 2024.
[21] S. Liu, Z. Zeng, T. Ren, et al., “Grounding dino: Marrying dino with
grounded pre-training for open-set object detection,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.05499, 2023.
[22] T.
Ren,
S.
Liu,
A.
Zeng,
et
al.,
“Grounded
sam:
Assem-
bling open-world models for diverse visual tasks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2401.14159, 2024.
[23] F. Li, H. Zhang, P. Sun, X. Zou, S. Liu, J. Yang, C. Li, L. Zhang,
and J. Gao, “Semantic-sam: Segment and recognize anything at any
granularity,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2307.04767, 2023.
[24] M. Qin, W. Li, J. Zhou, H. Wang, and H. Pfister, “Langsplat:
3d language gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 20051–
20060, 2024.
[25] J.-C. Shi, M. Wang, H.-B. Duan, and S.-H. Guan, “Language em-
bedded 3d gaussians for open-vocabulary scene understanding,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 5333–5343, 2024.
[26] S. Zhou, H. Chang, S. Jiang, Z. Fan, Z. Zhu, D. Xu, P. Chari, S. You,
Z. Wang, and A. Kadambi, “Feature 3dgs: Supercharging 3d gaussian
splatting to enable distilled feature fields,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pp. 21676–21685, 2024.
[27] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al., “Learning transferable
visual models from natural language supervision,” in International
conference on machine learning, pp. 8748–8763, PMLR, 2021.
[28] M. Ye, M. Danelljan, F. Yu, and L. Ke, “Gaussian grouping: Segment
and edit anything in 3d scenes,” in ECCV, 2024.
[29] Y. Wu, J. Meng, H. Li, C. Wu, Y. Shi, X. Cheng, C. Zhao,
H. Feng, E. Ding, J. Wang, et al., “Opengaussian: Towards point-level
3d gaussian-based open vocabulary understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.02058, 2024.
[30] H. K. Cheng, S. W. Oh, B. Price, A. Schwing, and J.-Y. Lee, “Tracking
anything with decoupled video segmentation,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 1316–
1326, 2023.
[31] Y. Yin, Y. Liu, Y. Xiao, D. Cohen-Or, J. Huang, and B. Chen, “Sai3d:
Segment any instance in 3d scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 3292–
3302, 2024.
[32] K. J. Oguine, R. D. S. Mukul, N. Drenkow, and M. Unberath, “From
generalization to precision: exploring sam for tool segmentation in
surgical environments,” in Medical Imaging 2024: Image Processing,
vol. 12926, pp. 7–12, SPIE, 2024.
[33] A. Carraro, M. Sozzi, and F. Marinello, “The segment anything
model (sam) for accelerating the smart farming revolution,” Smart
agricultural technology, vol. 6, p. 100367, 2023.
[34] Y. Liu, S. Halek, L. Li, M. Tomaszewski, S. Wang, R. Baumgartner,
J. Yuan, G. Goldmacher, and A. Chen, “Universal 3d ct lesion
segmentation using sam with recist annotation,” in Medical Imaging
2024: Image Processing, vol. 12926, pp. 23–28, SPIE, 2024.
[35] J. Straub, T. Whelan, L. Ma, Y. Chen, E. Wijmans, S. Green, J. J.
Engel, R. Mur-Artal, C. Ren, S. Verma, et al., “The replica dataset:
A digital replica of indoor spaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797,
2019.
[36] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cremers,
“A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems,” in 2012
IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems,
pp. 573–580, IEEE, 2012.
[37] C. Yan, D. Qu, D. Xu, B. Zhao, Z. Wang, D. Wang, and X. Li, “Gs-
slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recog-
nition, pp. 19595–19604, 2024.
[38] L. Zhu, Y. Li, E. Sandstr¨om, S. Huang, K. Schindler, and I. Armeni,
“Loopsplat: Loop closure by registering 3d gaussian splats,” 2024.
