<!-- page 1 -->
Deblur Gaussian Splatting SLAM
Francesco Girlanda1
Denys Rozumnyi1
Marc Pollefeys1,2
Martin R. Oswald3
1ETH Zürich
2Microsoft
3University of Amsterdam
Figure 1. Deblur-SLAM can successfully track the camera and reconstruct sharp maps for highly motion-blurred sequences. We directly
model motion blur, which enables us to achieve high-quality reconstructions, both on challenging synthetic (top) and real (bottom) data.
Abstract
We present Deblur-SLAM, a robust RGB SLAM pipeline de-
signed to recover sharp reconstructions from motion-blurred
inputs. The proposed method bridges the strengths of both
frame-to-frame and frame-to-model approaches to model
sub-frame camera trajectories that lead to high-fidelity re-
constructions in motion-blurred settings. Moreover, our
pipeline incorporates techniques such as online loop closure
and global bundle adjustment to achieve a dense and precise
global trajectory. We model the physical image formation
process of motion-blurred images and minimize the error
between the observed blurry images and rendered blurry im-
ages obtained by averaging sharp virtual sub-frame images.
Additionally, by utilizing a monocular depth estimator along-
side the online deformation of Gaussians, we ensure precise
mapping and enhanced image deblurring. The proposed
SLAM pipeline integrates all these components to improve
the results. We achieve state-of-the-art results for sharp
map estimation and sub-frame trajectory recovery both on
synthetic and real-world blurry input data.
1. Introduction
The challenge of reconstructing the real world with high
fidelity has long been a core problem in computer vision,
essential for applications such as robotic navigation, VR/AR,
architecture, and autonomous vehicles. Achieving accurate,
detailed representations of physical environments is crucial,
and dense visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) systems address this by estimating a precise recon-
struction of an environment while simultaneously localizing
the camera frames.
Traditional 3D SLAM approaches typically rely on geo-
metric representations, implemented in various forms, such
as weights of an MLP [1, 39, 45, 63], features anchored in
dense grids [5, 32, 44, 54, 64, 74, 75, 89, 90], hierarchical oc-
trees [79] and points/surfels [27, 56, 68], mesh [3], and voxel
hashing [8, 40, 49, 85, 86]. Recent visual SLAM approaches
further capture visual appearance, drawing on advances in
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [42] and its variants [29, 43],
allowing for photorealistic image synthesis of environments.
These advances enable new possibilities in complex down-
stream tasks, including detailed semantic scene understand-
ing [23], language-guided manipulation [59], and visual nav-
arXiv:2503.12572v1  [cs.CV]  16 Mar 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
igation [58]. Additionally, neural representations have the
advantage of filling unseen regions with smooth geometric
estimation and offering a low-memory footprint [45, 63, 71].
Methods based on 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [29]
yield high-fidelity renderings [22, 26, 41, 53, 76, 81] and
show promising results in the RGB-only setting, given their
flexibility in optimizing surface locations [22, 41, 53]. How-
ever, these methods often lack multi-view depth and geo-
metric priors, leading to suboptimal geometry in RGB-only
applications. Most approaches also only implement frame-to-
model tracking without global trajectory and map optimiza-
tion, which can result in excessive drift, especially under real-
world conditions. Frame-to-frame tracking methods, com-
bined with loop closure and global bundle adjustment (BA),
still achieve state-of-the-art tracking accuracy [82, 84, 86].
The current state-of-the-art in SLAM is SplatSLAM [53],
which seeks to incorporate the strengths of frame-to-frame
methods by integrating loop closure, global bundle adjust-
ment, and deformable 3D Gaussian maps.
At the same time, motion blur is a common phenomenon
that degrades image quality due to fast camera motion –
a common failure of most state-of-the-art SLAM and 3D
reconstruction methods. These methods do not employ any
strategy to handle severe motion-blurred images that usually
lead to worse reconstruction quality.
The proposed Deblur-SLAM method aims to solve the
under-constrained motion-blurred setting. It combines both
frame-to-frame and frame-to-model approaches and esti-
mates sub-frame trajectories that lead to sharper reconstruc-
tions (see Fig. 1). We make the following contributions:
• We propose an RGB SLAM method that explicitly ad-
dresses and models camera motion blur. This leads to
sharp maps even when input frames are highly blurred by
fast camera motion.
• For increased robustness, we combine frame-to-frame and
frame-to-model trackers and, for the first time, incorporate
loop closure, bundle adjustment, and online refinement
into a deblurring SLAM framework.
• In contrast to most SLAM methods, we estimate trajecto-
ries with sub-frame precision.
2. Related work
Dense visual SLAM. Curless and Levoy [9] pioneered
dense online 3D mapping using truncated signed distance
functions (TSDF). KinectFusion [44] demonstrated real-time
SLAM through depth maps. To address pose drift, glob-
ally consistent pose estimation and dense mapping tech-
niques have been developed, often by dividing the global
map into submaps [4, 6, 7, 11, 17, 20, 24, 25, 33, 36–
38, 40, 48, 61, 67, 67]. Loop detection triggers submap
deformation via pose graph optimization [6, 7, 15, 16, 19–
21, 25, 30, 33, 37, 38, 40, 48, 56, 61, 67, 70, 77], and
global bundle adjustment (BA) is employed for refine-
ment [6, 8, 11, 21, 40, 56, 67, 68, 77, 80]. While 3D Gaus-
sian SLAM with RGB-D input has demonstrated promising
results, these methods do not consider global consistency
through mechanisms like loop closure [26, 81, 86]. Point-
SLAM [52] creates photorealistic 3D maps using a dynamic
neural point cloud. DROID-SLAM [68] achieves global
consistency directly minimizing reprojection errors, which
iteratively refines dense optical flow and camera poses. Re-
cent advancements like GO-SLAM [86], HI-SLAM [85],
and GlORIE-SLAM [82] optimize factor graphs for accurate
tracking. For a recent in-depth survey on NeRF-inspired
dense SLAM, we refer to [69].
RGB SLAM. Most research concentrates on combining
RGB and depth cameras. RGB-only methods are less ex-
plored due to the lack of geometric data, which introduces
scale, depth ambiguities, motion blur and motion parallax ef-
fects. Nonetheless, dense SLAM using only RGB cameras is
attractive for its cost-effectiveness and versatility across dif-
ferent environments. MonoGS [41] and Photo-SLAM [22]
were pioneers in implementing RGB-only SLAM using 3D
Gaussians. However, their lack of proxy depth informa-
tion limits their ability to achieve high-accuracy mapping.
MonoGS [41] does not ensure global consistency either.
SplatSLAM [53] incorporates global consistency but lacks
strategies to handle motion blur as well as modeling dense
sub-frame trajectories.
Image deblurring. Motion blur significantly impacts the
output quality of many computer vision methods and has
been a longstanding subject of active research. Various stud-
ies have addressed the effects of motion blur, enabling the
reconstruction of sharp 3D maps when the input images are
blurred [12, 13, 18, 31, 35, 57]. In visual SLAM systems,
input measurements are particularly susceptible to motion
blur because a moving camera captures images over the ex-
posure period. To mitigate this, we parametrize the camera
trajectory during the exposure time and optimize sub-frame
camera poses to match the blurred inputs, similar to the ap-
proaches in [2, 50, 51, 72, 87, 88]. Similar to our setting,
I2-SLAM [2] aims to reconstruct photorealistic and sharp
maps from casually captured videos that contain severe mo-
tion blur and varying appearances. In contrast to our work, it
lacks global consistency through loop closure, bundle adjust-
ment, an online refinement of the deformable 3D Gaussian
map, and, specifically for the RGB setting, a monocular
depth estimator to improve Gaussian initialization.
The proposed Deblur-SLAM overcomes these limitations
by leveraging a globally consistent tracker, a monocular
depth estimator, and a deformable 3D Gaussian map that
adapts online to loop closure and global bundle adjustment,
as in [53]. By directly modeling the camera motion blur, we
present a complete pipeline that addresses blur, which is the
most common issue of state-of-the-art SLAM methods.

<!-- page 3 -->
Figure 2. Architecture of Deblur-SLAM. Given an RGB input stream, we estimate an initial pose through local bundle adjustment (BA)
using joint Disparity, Scale and Pose Optimization (DSPO). This pose is later refined through frame-to-model tracking that learns a sub-frame
trajectory. Each keyframe is then mapped, taking advantage of the estimated monocular depth. The sub-frame trajectory is applied to render
virtual sharp images, which model the physical image formation of blurry images. We optimize the photometric and geometric error between
the observed blurry image and the average of our sharp images. We further refine poses globally via online loop closure, global BA, and a
deformable 3D Gaussian map that adjusts for global pose and depth updates before each mapping phase.
3. Method
Deblur-SLAM aims to bridge the strengths of both frame-
to-frame and frame-to-model approaches in order to get
sub-frames trajectories that lead to sharp reconstructions in
a motion-blurred setting. We leverage SplatSLAM [53]’s
frame-to-frame features to provide precise initialization of
both camera poses and Gaussians. Then, we stack a frame-
to-model tracker on top to learn the sub-frame trajectory,
allowing sharp images to be rendered at sub-frame preci-
sion. We refer to these sharp images as ‚virtual images‘,
which can be used to generate a video with a higher frame
rate. We optimize the photometric and geometric error be-
tween the observed blurry image and the synthesized blurred
image, obtained by averaging the sharp virtual sub-frames
(Fig. 2). During optimization, we use an adjustment process
to regularize the sub-frame trajectory, aligning it with the
global trajectory to achieve a highly accurate and detailed
reconstruction. These three components – frame-to-frame
tracker, frame-to-model tracker, and blur decomposition –
are the main components of the proposed method, which are
detailed in the following subsections.
3.1. Motion blur image formation model
The physical formation process of an image in a digital cam-
era consists of gathering photons during the exposure period
that are later converted to a digital image. This process can
be formalized by integrating a sequence of sharp images:
B(u) = ϕ
Z τ
0
Ct(u)dt ,
(1)
where B(u) ∈R3 represents the motion-blurred image,
u ∈R2 is a pixel in the image, ϕ is a normalization factor, τ
is the exposure time, Ct(u) ∈R3 is the virtual sharp image
captured at sub-frame time t ∈[0, τ]. This camera model
approximates motion blur by discretizing into M timestamps
(or virtual views):
B(u) ≈1
M
M−1
X
i=0
Ci(u) .
(2)
The camera trajectory representation is parametric and has a
fixed number of control points (by default, we use 2). We use
M virtual cameras/views that are obtained through a linear
interpolation between the control points using LERP (Linear
intERPolation) for the translation vector and SLERP (Spher-
ical Linear intERPolation) for the rotation matrix. By ren-
dering views from the virtual cameras, we obtain so-called
virtual sharp images. The pipeline can be easily extended
to more complex interpolations, such as the cubic B-spline
interpolation with four control points in the SE(3) space.
We refer to prior work [34, 72, 87] for details about the
interpolation and derivations of the related Jacobian.
3.2. Deformable 3D Gaussian Splatting
We adopt a deformable 3D Gaussian Splatting representation
that allows us to achieve global consistency. The scene is
represented by a set G = {gi}N
i=1 of N 3D Gaussians. Each
Gaussian gi is parameterized by its centroid µi ∈R3, 3D
covariance Σ ∈R3×3, opacity σ ∈[0, 1] and color c ∈R3.
The distribution of each scaled Gaussian is defined as:
gi(x) = exp

−1
2 (x −µi)⊤Σ−1
i
(x −µi)

.
(3)
As in previous methods, we ensure that the 3D covariance Σ
remains positive semi-definite. To reduce the optimization

<!-- page 4 -->
Figure 3. Qualitative results on real-world ScanNet [10] data. Given the input blurry frames from scenes 0169 and 0207, we manage to
track the trajectory with sub-frame precision and estimate sharp maps by directly modeling the camera motion blur.
complexity, 3DGS represents Σi using a scale Si ∈R3 and
rotation matrix Ri ∈R3×3 stored by a quaternion qi ∈R4
leading to the decomposition Σi = RiSiST
i RT
i .
Rendering.
To render 3D Gaussians to a 2D plane, we
project the covariance matrix Σ as Σ′ = JRΣRT JT and
project µ as µ′ = Kω−1µ, where R is the rotation compo-
nent of world-to-camera extrinsic ω−1, and J is the Jacobian
of the affine approximation of the projective transforma-
tion [91]. The final pixel color C and depth Dr at pixel x′ is
rendered by rasterizing the obtained Gaussians that overlap
with the given pixel, sorted by their depth as
C =
X
i∈N
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1−αj) ,
Dr =
X
i∈N
ˆdiαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1−αj)
(4)
where ˆdi is the z-axis depth of the center of the i-th Gaussian.
We obtain the 2D opacity αi by multiplying the 3D opacity
oi and the 2D Gaussian density as
αi = oi exp

−1
2 (x′ −µ′
i)⊤Σ′−1
i
(x′ −µ′
i)

.
(5)
Map initialization. We assume the camera remains static
for at least one initial frame at the start of the sequence.
This approach ensures a sharp frame at the beginning of our
pipeline, providing a reliable basis for effectively initializing
the Gaussians. This assumption is common in real-life use
cases and hold true for all tested real-world datasets. To
improve the map initialization in the RGB setting, we make
use of a proxy depth map D that combines the inlier multi-
view depth ˜D and the monocular depth Dmono:
D(u, v) =
( ˜D(u, v)
if ˜D(u, v) is valid
θDmono (u, v) + γ
otherwise
,
(6)
where θ and γ are computed as in the initial least square
fitting (see supplementary material).
Keyframe selection. We employ the strategies from [41,
53], i.e. we use both an optical flow threshold τf and a
keyframe selection strategy to avoid mapping redundant
frames. Since our viewpoints now consist of interpolating
two control points, we calculate the intersection over union
(IoU) on the viewpoint using the midpoint between them.
Mapping loss. The rendered blurry image Bk is defined as:
Bk = ak
 
1
M
M−1
X
i=0
Ci
!
+ bk ,
(7)
where ak and bk are optimizable parameters to account for
varying exposure and lightning changes, and M is the num-
ber of virtual images.
We optimize the difference between Bk and the observed
input image, applying a photometric and geometric loss to
the image and a scale regularizer to avoid artifacts from
elongated Gaussians. Our photometric loss is defined as:
Lph = λSSIMLSSIM + (1 −λSSIM)
Bk −Bgt
k

1 ,
(8)
where Bk is the image after the exposure correction of equa-
tion (7). This term, together with the geometric loss and the

<!-- page 5 -->
Figure 4. Qualitative comparison to Splat-SLAM. We compare in both a darker scene (office 1 – top) and a very bright scene (office 2 –
bottom) on the newly proposed synthetically blurred Replica dataset [60], showing the versatility of the proposed model. From left to right:
the observed frame with visible camera motion blur, the SplatSLAM [53] rendering, one of our sharp virtual images, and the ground truth.
The proposed Deblur-SLAM method can recover more details such as the boxes (top) and the pillow (bottom).
scale regularizer, leads to the final optimization objective:
min
G,a,b
X
k∈KFs
λ
Nk
Lph+ 1−λ
Nk
 ¯Dr
k −Dk

1+ λreg
|G|
|G|
X
i
|si −˜si|1 ,
(9)
where KFs contains the set of keyframes in the local win-
dow, Nk is the number of pixels per keyframe, ¯Dr
k is the
average depth of the virtual views at frame k. We denote
hyperparameters as λ, λSSIM and λreg. The mean scaling is
represented by ˜s. After the end of the online process, we
perform a set of final refinements as in [41, 53, 82].
Map deformation. Since we update keyframe poses and
proxy depth maps online, the 3D Gaussian map is adjusted
by a non-rigid deformation as in [53]. We update the mean,
scale, and rotation of all Gaussians gi that are associated
with the given keyframe. The mean µi is projected into ω to
find pixel correspondence (u, v). Since the Gaussians are not
necessarily anchored on the surface, instead of re-anchoring
the mean at multi-view depth D′, we shift the mean by
D′(u, v) −D(u, v) along the optical axis and update Ri and
si accordingly as
µ′
i =

1 + D′(u, v) −D(u, v)
(ω−1µi)z

ω′ω−1µi ,
(10)
R′
i = R′R−1Ri, s′
i =

1 + D′(u, v) −D(u, v)
(ω−1µi)z

si . (11)
3.3. Frame-to-frame tracking
In the tracking phase, we initialize the pose using a pre-
trained recurrent optical flow model coupled with a Dis-
parity, Scale and Pose Optimization (DSPO) objective
from [53, 68], to optimize camera poses jointly with per-
pixel disparities.
The optimization process uses the Gauss-Newton algo-
rithm on a factor graph G(V, E), where the nodes V rep-
resent the keyframe poses and disparities, and edges E
model the optical flow between these keyframes. Odom-
etry keyframe edges are incorporated into G by calculating
the optical flow relative to the previously added keyframe. If
the mean flow exceeds a threshold τf ∈R, a new keyframe
is introduced into G. The DSPO objective contains two
distinct optimization objectives that are addressed in an al-
ternating fashion. The primary objective, known as Dense
Bundle Adjustment (DBA) [66, 68], jointly optimizes the

<!-- page 6 -->
pose and disparity of the keyframes, as shown in equation
(12). This objective operates on a sliding temporal window
centered around the current frame, i.e.
arg min
ω,d
X
(i,j)∈E
˜pij −Kω−1
j

ωi (1/di) K−1[pi, 1]T 
2
Σij ,
(12)
where ˜pij ∈R(W ×H×2)×1 represents the predicted pixel
coordinates after warping pi into keyframe j via optical
flow. Matrix K denotes the camera intrinsics, while ωj
and ωi denote camera-to-world extrinsics. The Mahalanobis
distance ∥· ∥Σij incorporates confidence-based weights.
The second objective, called Disparity, Scale and Pose
Optimization (DSPO), refines disparity using monocular
depth Dmono from a pretrained DPT model [46, 47], ensuring
correct scale and shift estimation:
arg min
dh,θ,γ
X
(i,j)∈E
˜pij −Kω−1
j

ωi
 1/dh
i

K−1 [pi, 1]T 
2
Σij
+α1
X
i∈V
dh
i −(θi (1/Dmono
i
) + γi)
2
(13)
+α2
X
i∈V
dl
i −(θi (1/Dmono
i
) + γi)
2 .
Here, the optimizable parameters are scales θ ∈R, shifts
γ ∈R and a subset of disparities dh classified as being high
error (see supplementary material). This approach is used
as the monocular depth is only valuable in regions where
the multi-view disparity di optimization lacks accuracy. Ad-
ditionally, setting α1 < α2 ensures that scales θ and shifts
γ are optimized with the preserved low-error disparities dl.
The scale θi and shift γi are initially estimated using least
squares fitting (see supplementary material). By optimizing
DBA and DSPO alternatingly, we avoid the scale ambiguity
encountered if d, θ, γ, and ω are optimized jointly.
Loop closure. To reduce scale and pose drift, we incorpo-
rate loop closure and online global bundle adjustment (BA)
alongside local window frame tracking. As in [53], loop
detection is performed by calculating the mean optical flow
magnitude between the currently active keyframes within the
local window and all previous keyframes. For each keyframe
pair, we assess that the optical flow must be below a specified
threshold τloop, and that the time interval between frames
must exceed a set threshold τt ensuring co-visibility between
the views. When both criteria are satisfied, a unidirectional
edge is introduced into the graph.
Global BA. For the online global bundle adjustment (BA), a
separate graph is constructed to include all keyframes up to
the current point. Edges in this graph are added on the basis
of the temporal and spatial relationships between keyframes.
To ensure numerical stability, the scales of the disparities and
poses are normalized before each global BA optimization.
Figure 5. Qualitative results on the Replica dataset (office 3
scene) [60]. We outperform Splat-SLAM [53] on blurry data.
3.4. Frame-to-model tracking
In contrast to Splat-SLAM [53], we further refine the pre-
vious frame-to-frame tracking by frame-to-model tracking
using our deblur image formation model. Using the frame-
to-frame pose as the initial pose (treated as a pose in the
middle of the sub-frame trajectory), we run iterative opti-
mization on the pose and affine brightness parameters for
varying exposure. This initialization helps us to align with
the global trajectory, which is estimated by the DSPO ob-
jective. This step also allows us to minimize the difference
between the average of generated sharp virtual subframes
and the observed blurry image. The optimization objective
is as follows:
L1 = 1
N
N
X
i=1

α(i)·
B(i)·W(i)−Bgt(i)·W(i)


, (14)
where α represents the mean of opacities that allows us to
mask the yet unmapped part of the input image. Then, W
is an edge mask used to calculate the gradient only on the
edge pixel, B(i) is a pixel of the image after the exposure
correction as defined in (7), and Bgt is the blurry observed
image. N is the number of pixels. Frame index k is omitted

<!-- page 7 -->
Method
Metric
office0
office1
office2
office3
office4
room0
room1
room2
Avg.
Avg. w.o. ✗
MonoGS [41]
sPSNR↑
25.30
27.82
21.81
23.91
23.61
22.21
20.95
24.95
23.82
24.11
sSSIM↑
0.82
0.88
0.81
0.83
0.85
0.72
0.74
0.82
0.81
0.82
sLPIPS↓
0.43
0.30
0.40
0.32
0.40
0.47
0.48
0.37
0.40
0.39
sATE[cm]↓
30.84
13.97
50.16
3.69
108.62
44.05
51.80
11.51
39.33
41.89
Splat-
SLAM [53]
sPSNR↑
28.52
28.88
22.53
25.01
25.25
23.71
✗
✗
✗
25.65
sSSIM↑
0.84
0.87
0.79
0.81
0.84
0.74
✗
✗
✗
0.82
sLPIPS↓
0.36
0.30
0.35
0.27
0.34
0.39
✗
✗
✗
0.34
sATE[cm]↓
2.88
2.12
2.34
2.05
4.53
1.90
✗
✗
✗
2.64
Deblur-SLAM
(Ours)
sPSNR↑
30.40
30.29
25.20
26.52
27.06
25.75
25.25
27.74
27.28
27.54
sSSIM↑
0.87
0.88
0.84
0.87
0.86
0.80
0.76
0.85
0.84
0.85
sLPIPS↓
0.24
0.21
0.27
0.16
0.25
0.23
0.34
0.22
0.24
0.23
sATE[cm]↓
3.04
2.94
1.52
1.00
3.75
1.08
5.87
3.78
2.87
2.22
Table 1. Sub-frame evaluation on Replica [60]. Since this is a synthetic dataset, ground truth sub-frame trajectories and renderings are
available. Thus, we evaluate the sub-frame version of PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, and ATE (denoted by "s" in front). Our method achieves new
state-of-the-art performance in estimating those sub-frame trajectories and renderings. A complete failure of the method is denoted by ✗.
The best-performing method is denoted by bold font and dark green color, second best by light green, and worst-performing by yellow.
for simplicity.
While tracking further frames, we take advantage of the
frame-to-frame online optimization and adjust the sub-frame
trajectories using linear interpolation to follow the learned
global trajectory.
Exposure gap estimation. In the above optimization, we
further introduce two parameters to model the exposure gap
between input frames. This helps improving the rendering
quality on real-world datasets. We learn these two parame-
ters by rendering each keyframe’s previous and next frames
following the same procedure used for the frame-to-model
step. In addition, we include a regularization term to ensure
that the learned subframe trajectory remains smooth. Con-
cretely, we minimize the distance between the end of the
previous frame and the beginning of the current keyframe,
taking the gap parameter into account. The same approach
is applied between the current keyframe and the next frame.
To achieve this, we compute two interpolation points, one
between the previous and the current frame, as well as one
between the current and the next frame:
tprev = 0.5 + gprev ,
tnext = 0.5 + gnext,
(15)
which indicates how far along the motion is between the
midpoint extrinsics of the respective frames. gprev, gnext
represent the exposure gaps. We use linear interpolation for
the translation components and SLERP for the quaternions
to obtain the expected start and end pose. We then compare
this interpolated pose with the actual viewpoint pose by mea-
suring the squared norm of their translational difference and
the squared quaternion angle difference of their rotations:
Ltrans =
tviewpoint −tinterp
2,
(16)
Lrot =
2 arccos
q−1
1
· q2

2.
(17)
where Ltrans is the squared norm of the difference between
the translation vectors, and Lrot is the squared norm of the an-
gular difference between the two quaternions corresponding
to the rotation matrices.
4. Experiments
Datasets. To evaluate our method, we generate a synthet-
ically blurred Replica dataset made from the scenes used
in [41]. By linearly interpolating the existing trajectory we
added 8 sub-poses in between the existing ones. We rendered
the new frames using Habitat-Sim [65] and then averaged
36 frames to create a blurry dataset for evaluation. We also
test on real-world data using the TUM-RGBD [62], ScanNet
datasets [10] and ETH3D [55] datasets.
Metrics. For evaluation on Replica [60], we report PSNR,
SSIM [73] and LPIPS [83] on the rendered keyframe images
against the original sharp images (denoted by "s" in front
as in Table 1). Thus, we also evaluate the deblurring capa-
bilities. For evaluation on ScanNet and TUM-RGBD, we
evaluate the Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) [62] between
the virtual camera poses (as interpolated between two con-
trol points) and the ground truth poses used to render the
dataset in Replica. For real-world datasets, we evaluate the
mid-pose of the two control points against the ground truth.
Implementation details. We use 9 virtual cameras for the
synthetic Replica dataset (as we use the original one and
the 8 generated ones) to maintain a good correspondence
with the original data while taking advantage of the fact
that 9 is a divisor of the 36 averaged frames. We use 5
virtual cameras for the real-world data (but compare only
to a single ground truth pose as sub-frame ground truth is
unavailable). We keep the same frame-to-frame parameters
as in [53]. Experiments are conducted on an AMD EPYC
7742 processor and NVIDIA GPU GeForce RTX 3090 with
24 GB memory.
Results on synthetic data. We tested our method on the
proposed synthetic Replica dataset with sub-frame ground
truth. Qualitative results are in Figs. 4 and 5. These results
show that our method successfully models the physical blur
formation and renders sharp virtual images. Our method
outperforms all other methods on all metrics (Table 1).

<!-- page 8 -->
Method
Metric
0000
0059
0106
0169
0181
0207
Avg.
MonoGS [41]
ATE [cm]↓
149.2
96.8
155.5
140.3
92.6
101.9
122.7
Splat-SLAM [53]
ATE [cm]↓
5.5
9.1
7.0
8.2
8.3
7.5
7.6
Deblur-SLAM (Ours)
ATE [cm]↓
6.1
8.9
7.4
8.0
7.4
7.3
7.5
Table 2. Trajectory evaluation on ScanNet [10]. We achieve state-of-the-art results on trajectory estimation. We refer to qualitative results
on this dataset (Fig. 3) to highlight the deblurring capabilities of Deblur-SLAM.
Method
Method
f1/desk
f2/xyz
f3/off
f1/desk2
f1/room
Avg.
MonoGS [41]
ATE [cm]↓
3.8
5.2
2.9
75.7
76.6
32.84
Splat-SLAM [53]
ATE [cm]↓
1.6
0.2
1.4
2.8
4.2
2.04
Deblur-SLAM (Ours)
ATE [cm]↓
1.6
0.2
1.5
2.5
4.2
2.00
Table 3. Trajectory evaluation on TUM-RGBD [62]. As in Table 2, we evaluate the tracking performances of our method. Our method
yields similar or better tracking errors than Splat-SLAM and strongly outperforms MonoGS.
Method
Metric
f1/desk
f2/xyz
f3/off
Avg.
I2-SLAM [2]
ATE [cm]↓
1.6
0.3
1.9
1.3
Deblur-SLAM
ATE [cm]↓
1.6
0.2
1.5
1.1
Table 4. Tracking performances on TUM-RGBD [62], compared
to the only related method that solves a similar problem. Our
method achieves more accurate trajectory estimates (other proper-
ties cannot be evaluated since their code is not publicly released).
Method
Metric
sofa 1
sfm_bench
plant_scene_1
SplatSLAM
[53]
PSNR↑
20.50
15.44
28.42
SSIM↑
0.66
0.46
0.87
LPIPS↓
0.43
0.56
0.18
sPSNR↑
14.09
12.07
21.74
sSSIM↑
0.53
0.39
0.77
sLPIPS↓
0.61
0.65
0.28
Deblur-SLAM
(Ours)
PSNR↑
26.60
19.96
28.38
SSIM↑
0.89
0.71
0.87
LPIPS↓
0.18
0.35
0.14
sPSNR↑
15.00
13.72
23.00
sSSIM↑
0.62
0.55
0.81
sLPIPS↓
0.56
0.51
0.22
Table 5. Rendering evaluation on ETH3D [55] with synthetically
blurred frames. By averaging frames to introduce blur we can
evaluate method performance against GT. Our method outperforms
Splat-SLAM on both sharp (denoted with "s" prefix) and averaged
rendering metrics.
Results on real data. In real-world datasets, the absence
of proper ground truth prevents testing the sharp frames di-
rectly. A recent method solving a similar problem has been
introduced in I2-SLAM [2], but sharp frames are manually
selected, and metrics are evaluated solely on these frames,
potentially introducing bias. To date, there is no available
information about the specific frames used, nor has the code
been shared, making comparisons challenging. Only trajec-
tory evaluation on TUM-RGBD could be compared, shown
in Table 4. Our method outperforms I2-SLAM in this setting.
Additionally, we present evaluation on ScanNet and TUM-
RGBD datasets in Tables 2 and 3, evaluating the trajectory
error against other baselines. Our method outperforms all
other methods on trajectory error (ATE).
Test on Blurry Real-World Dataset.
To further assess
our model, we conducted experiments on the TUM-RGBD
dataset [62] and ETH3D [55], where we increased the mo-
tion blur by averaging 2-5 frames. We matched the number
of virtual cameras to the number of averaged frames, al-
lowing us to pair each virtual image with a high-quality
ground-truth frame. This setup enables us to showcase the
effectiveness of our method in a different scenario. We man-
aged to surpass all other metrics, demonstrating the overall
effectiveness of our approach. We achieve better outcomes,
especially for sharp virtual images, and observe a significant
improvement in the ATE. The results can be seen in Table 5.
More experiments and qualitative results can be found in the
supplementary material.
Runtime. We tested the runtime of our method on ScanNet
scene 0106_00, where it is 0.36 fps. Consequently, in
terms of virtual sub-frame images, the runtime is 1.82 fps.
This evaluation includes only the online process and not the
final offline refinement at the end.
Limitations.
Our method does not model and recover
motion blur from moving objects. This requires further
decomposition and is an interesting future work. In practice,
not all video frames are blurry, and the high computational
overhead for deblurring could be reduced by dynamically
adapting the generated number M of virtual views.
5. Conclusions
We presented Deblur-SLAM, a robust RGB SLAM pipeline
to recover sharp reconstructions from blurry inputs. Our
pipeline takes advantage of sub-frame trajectory modeling,
online loop closure, and global BA to achieve dense and
accurate trajectories. Moreover, we model the physical im-
age formation process of motion-blurred images and ensure
sharp, sub-frame, and precise mapping thanks to the monoc-
ular depth estimator and online deformation of Gaussians.
Deblur-SLAM applies these techniques in the context of
scene deblurring for the first time. Experiments show that
our method outperforms existing methods.

<!-- page 9 -->
References
[1] Dejan Azinovi´c, Ricardo Martin-Brualla, Dan B Goldman,
Matthias Nießner, and Justus Thies. Neural rgb-d surface
reconstruction. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 6290–6301, 2022. 1
[2] Gwangtak Bae, Changwoon Choi, Hyeongjun Heo, Sang Min
Kim, and Young Min Kim. I2-slam: Inverting imaging pro-
cess for robust photorealistic dense slam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2407.11347, 2024. 2, 8
[3] Michael Bloesch, Tristan Laidlow, Ronald Clark, Stefan
Leutenegger, and Andrew J Davison. Learning meshes for
dense visual slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, pages 5855–5864,
2019. 1
[4] Michael Bosse, Paul Newman, John Leonard, Martin Soika,
Wendelin Feiten, and Seth Teller. An atlas framework for
scalable mapping. In 2003 IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (Cat. No. 03CH37422), pages
1899–1906. IEEE, 2003. 2
[5] Aljaž Božiˇc, Pablo Palafox, Justus Thies, Angela Dai,
and Matthias Nießner. Transformerfusion: Monocular rgb
scene reconstruction using transformers.
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2107.02191, 2021. 1
[6] Yan-Pei Cao, Leif Kobbelt, and Shi-Min Hu. Real-time high-
accuracy three-dimensional reconstruction with consumer
rgb-d cameras. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), 37(5):
1–16, 2018. 2
[7] Sungjoon Choi, Qian-Yi Zhou, and Vladlen Koltun. Robust
reconstruction of indoor scenes. In IEEE Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 5556–5565,
2015. 2
[8] Chi-Ming Chung, Yang-Che Tseng, Ya-Ching Hsu, Xiang-
Qian Shi, Yun-Hung Hua, Jia-Fong Yeh, Wen-Chin Chen,
Yi-Ting Chen, and Winston H Hsu. Orbeez-slam: A real-time
monocular visual slam with orb features and nerf-realized
mapping. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.13274, 2022. 1, 2
[9] Brian Curless and Marc Levoy. Volumetric method for build-
ing complex models from range images.
In SIGGRAPH
Conference on Computer Graphics. ACM, 1996. 2
[10] Angela Dai, Angel X. Chang, Manolis Savva, Maciej Hal-
ber, Thomas Funkhouser, and Matthias Nießner. ScanNet:
Richly-annotated 3D reconstructions of indoor scenes. In Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR).
IEEE/CVF, 2017. 4, 7, 8, 13, 15
[11] Angela Dai, Matthias Nießner, Michael Zollhöfer, Shahram
Izadi, and Christian Theobalt. Bundlefusion: Real-time glob-
ally consistent 3d reconstruction using on-the-fly surface rein-
tegration. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36(4):1,
2017. 2
[12] Peng Dai, Yinda Zhang, Xin Yu, Xiaoyang Lyu, and Xiao-
juan Qi. Hybrid neural rendering for large-scale scenes with
motion blur. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 154–164,
2023. 2
[13] François Darmon, Lorenzo Porzi, Samuel Rota-Bulò, and
Peter Kontschieder. Robust gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.04211, 2024. 2
[14] Ainaz Eftekhar, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Amir
Zamir. Omnidata: A scalable pipeline for making multi-task
mid-level vision datasets from 3d scans. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 10786–10796, 2021. 13
[15] Felix Endres, Jürgen Hess, Nikolas Engelhard, Jürgen Sturm,
Daniel Cremers, and Wolfram Burgard. An evaluation of the
rgb-d slam system. In 2012 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation, pages 1691–1696. IEEE, 2012. 2
[16] Jakob Engel, Thomas Schöps, and Daniel Cremers. Lsd-slam:
Large-scale direct monocular slam. In European conference
on computer vision, pages 834–849. Springer, 2014. 2
[17] Nicola Fioraio, Jonathan Taylor, Andrew Fitzgibbon, Luigi
Di Stefano, and Shahram Izadi. Large-scale and drift-free
surface reconstruction using online subvolume registration.
In Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 4475–4483, 2015. 2
[18] Jiandong Guo, Rongrong Ni, and Yao Zhao. Deblurslam: A
novel visual slam system robust in blurring scene. In 2021
IEEE 7th International Conference on Virtual Reality (ICVR),
pages 62–68, 2021. 2
[19] Peter Henry, Michael Krainin, Evan Herbst, Xiaofeng Ren,
and Dieter Fox. Rgb-d mapping: Using kinect-style depth
cameras for dense 3d modeling of indoor environments. The
international journal of Robotics Research, 31(5):647–663,
2012. 2
[20] Peter Henry, Dieter Fox, Achintya Bhowmik, and Rajiv Mon-
gia. Patch volumes: Segmentation-based consistent mapping
with rgb-d cameras. In 2013 International Conference on 3D
Vision-3DV 2013, pages 398–405. IEEE, 2013. 2
[21] Jiarui Hu, Mao Mao, Hujun Bao, Guofeng Zhang, and
Zhaopeng Cui. CP-SLAM: Collaborative neural point-based
SLAM system. In Thirty-seventh Conference on Neural In-
formation Processing Systems, 2023. 2
[22] Huajian Huang, Longwei Li, Hui Cheng, and Sai-Kit Yeung.
Photo-slam: Real-time simultaneous localization and photo-
realistic mapping for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.16728, 2023. 2
[23] Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Alihusein Kuwajerwala, Qiao
Gu, Mohd Omama, Tao Chen, Alaa Maalouf, Shuang Li,
Ganesh Iyer, Soroush Saryazdi, Nikhil Keetha, Ayush Tewari,
Joshua B. Tenenbaum, Celso Miguel de Melo, Madhava Kr-
ishna, Liam Paull, Florian Shkurti, and Antonio Torralba.
Conceptfusion: Open-set multimodal 3d mapping, 2023. 1
[24] Olaf Kähler, Victor Adrian Prisacariu, Carl Yuheng Ren, Xin
Sun, Philip H. S. Torr, and David William Murray. Very
high frame rate volumetric integration of depth images on
mobile devices. IEEE Trans. Vis. Comput. Graph., 21(11):
1241–1250, 2015. 2
[25] Olaf Kähler, Victor A Prisacariu, and David W Murray. Real-
time large-scale dense 3d reconstruction with loop closure. In
Computer Vision–ECCV 2016: 14th European Conference,
Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-14, 2016, Proceed-
ings, Part VIII 14, pages 500–516. Springer, 2016. 2
[26] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula,
Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan, and
Jonathon Luiten. Splatam: Splat, track and map 3d gaus-
sians for dense rgb-d slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF

<!-- page 10 -->
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024. 2
[27] Maik Keller, Damien Lefloch, Martin Lambers, Shahram
Izadi, Tim Weyrich, and Andreas Kolb. Real-time 3d re-
construction in dynamic scenes using point-based fusion. In
International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 1–8.
IEEE, 2013. 1
[28] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and
George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance
field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4), 2023.
13
[29] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkühler, and
George Drettakis. 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance
field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4), 2023.
1, 2
[30] Christian Kerl, Jürgen Sturm, and Daniel Cremers. Dense
visual slam for rgb-d cameras. In 2013 IEEE/RSJ Interna-
tional Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, pages
2100–2106. IEEE, 2013. 2
[31] Byeonghyeon Lee, Howoong Lee, Xiangyu Sun, Usman Ali,
and Eunbyung Park. Deblurring 3d gaussian splatting. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.00834, 2024. 2
[32] Kejie Li, Yansong Tang, Victor Adrian Prisacariu, and
Philip HS Torr. Bnv-fusion: Dense 3d reconstruction using
bi-level neural volume fusion. In IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 6166–6175,
2022. 1
[33] Lorenzo Liso, Erik Sandström, Vladimir Yugay, Luc
Van Gool, and Martin R Oswald. Loopy-slam: Dense neural
slam with loop closures. arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.09944,
2024. 2
[34] Peidong Liu, Xingxing Zuo, Viktor Larsson, and Marc Polle-
feys. Mba-vo: Motion blur aware visual odometry. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 5550–5559, 2021. 3
[35] Li Ma, Xiaoyu Li, Jing Liao, Qi Zhang, Xuan Wang, Jue
Wang, and Pedro V Sander. Deblur-nerf: Neural radiance
fields from blurry images. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
pages 12861–12870, 2022. 2
[36] Robert Maier, Jürgen Sturm, and Daniel Cremers. Submap-
based bundle adjustment for 3d reconstruction from rgb-d
data.
In Pattern Recognition: 36th German Conference,
GCPR 2014, Münster, Germany, September 2-5, 2014, Pro-
ceedings 36, pages 54–65. Springer, 2014. 2
[37] R Maier, R Schaller, and D Cremers. Efficient online surface
correction for real-time large-scale 3d reconstruction. arxiv
2017. arXiv preprint arXiv:1709.03763, 2017. 2
[38] Yunxuan Mao, Xuan Yu, Kai Wang, Yue Wang, Rong Xiong,
and Yiyi Liao. Ngel-slam: Neural implicit representation-
based global consistent low-latency slam system.
arXiv
preprint arXiv:2311.09525, 2023. 2
[39] Hidenobu Matsuki, Edgar Sucar, Tristan Laidow, Kentaro
Wada, Raluca Scona, and Andrew J Davison. imode: Real-
time incremental monocular dense mapping using neural field.
In 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (ICRA), pages 4171–4177. IEEE, 2023. 1
[40] Hidenobu Matsuki, Keisuke Tateno, Michael Niemeyer, and
Federic Tombari. Newton: Neural view-centric mapping for
on-the-fly large-scale slam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.13654,
2023. 1, 2
[41] Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul HJ Kelly, and An-
drew J Davison. Gaussian splatting slam. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 18039–18048, 2024. 2, 4, 5, 7, 8, 13, 14
[42] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. NeRF:
Representing Scenes as Neural Radiance Fields for View Syn-
thesis. In European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV).
CVF, 2020. 1
[43] Thomas Müller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexan-
der Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a multireso-
lution hash encoding. arXiv preprint arXiv:2201.05989, 2022.
1
[44] Richard A Newcombe, Shahram Izadi, Otmar Hilliges, David
Molyneaux, David Kim, Andrew J Davison, Pushmeet Kohli,
Jamie Shotton, Steve Hodges, and Andrew W Fitzgibbon.
Kinectfusion: Real-time dense surface mapping and tracking.
In ISMAR, pages 127–136, 2011. 1, 2
[45] Joseph Ortiz, Alexander Clegg, Jing Dong, Edgar Sucar,
David Novotny, Michael Zollhoefer, and Mustafa Mukadam.
isdf: Real-time neural signed distance fields for robot percep-
tion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2204.02296, 2022. 1, 2
[46] René Ranftl, Katrin Lasinger, David Hafner, Konrad
Schindler, and Vladlen Koltun. Towards robust monocular
depth estimation: Mixing datasets for zero-shot cross-dataset
transfer. IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence (TPAMI), 2020. 6
[47] René Ranftl, Alexey Bochkovskiy, and Vladlen Koltun. Vi-
sion transformers for dense prediction. ArXiv preprint, 2021.
6
[48] Victor Reijgwart, Alexander Millane, Helen Oleynikova,
Roland Siegwart, Cesar Cadena, and Juan Nieto. Voxgraph:
Globally consistent, volumetric mapping using signed dis-
tance function submaps. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 5(1):227–234, 2019. 2
[49] Antoni Rosinol, John J. Leonard, and Luca Carlone. NeRF-
SLAM: Real-Time Dense Monocular SLAM with Neural
Radiance Fields. arXiv, 2022. 1
[50] Denys Rozumnyi, Martin R. Oswald, Vittorio Ferrari, and
Marc Pollefeys. Shape from blur: Recovering textured 3d
shape and motion of fast moving objects. In NeurIPS, 2021.
2
[51] Denys Rozumnyi, Martin R. Oswald, Vittorio Ferrari, and
Marc Pollefeys. Motion-from-blur: 3d shape and motion
estimation of motion-blurred objects in videos. In CVPR,
2022. 2
[52] Erik Sandström, Yue Li, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R Oswald.
Point-slam: Dense neural point cloud-based slam. In Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV). IEEE/CVF,
2023. 2
[53] Erik Sandström, Keisuke Tateno, Michael Oechsle, Michael
Niemeyer, Luc Van Gool, Martin R Oswald, and Federico
Tombari. Splat-slam: Globally optimized rgb-only slam with

<!-- page 11 -->
3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16544, 2024. 2, 3,
4, 5, 6, 7, 8, 13, 14
[54] Erik Sandström, Kevin Ta, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R.
Oswald. Uncle-SLAM: Uncertainty learning for dense neural
SLAM. In International Conference on Computer Vision
Workshops (ICCVW), 2023. 1
[55] Thomas Schöps, Torsten Sattler, and Marc Pollefeys. BAD
SLAM: Bundle adjusted direct RGB-D SLAM. In Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2019.
7, 8
[56] Thomas Schops, Torsten Sattler, and Marc Pollefeys. BAD
SLAM: Bundle adjusted direct RGB-D SLAM. In CVF/IEEE
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2019. 1, 2
[57] Otto Seiskari, Jerry Ylilammi, Valtteri Kaatrasalo, Pekka
Rantalankila, Matias Turkulainen, Juho Kannala, Esa Rahtu,
and Arno Solin. Gaussian splatting on the move: Blur and
rolling shutter compensation for natural camera motion, 2024.
2
[58] Nur Muhammad Mahi Shafiullah, Chris Paxton, Lerrel Pinto,
Soumith Chintala, and Arthur Szlam. Clip-fields: Weakly
supervised semantic fields for robotic memory, 2023. 2
[59] William Shen, Ge Yang, Alan Yu, Jansen Wong, Leslie Pack
Kaelbling, and Phillip Isola. Distilled feature fields enable
few-shot language-guided manipulation, 2023. 1
[60] Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik
Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J Engel, Raul Mur-Artal, Carl
Ren, Shobhit Verma, et al. The replica dataset: A digital
replica of indoor spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797,
2019. 5, 6, 7, 13, 14
[61] Jörg Stückler and Sven Behnke. Multi-resolution surfel maps
for efficient dense 3d modeling and tracking. Journal of Visual
Communication and Image Representation, 25(1):137–147,
2014. 2
[62] Jürgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram
Burgard, and Daniel Cremers. A benchmark for the evalua-
tion of rgb-d slam systems. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international
conference on intelligent robots and systems, pages 573–580.
IEEE, 2012. 7, 8, 13, 14
[63] Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J. Davi-
son. iMAP: Implicit Mapping and Positioning in Real-Time.
In International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV).
IEEE/CVF, 2021. 1, 2
[64] Jiaming Sun, Yiming Xie, Linghao Chen, Xiaowei Zhou,
and Hujun Bao. Neuralrecon: Real-time coherent 3d recon-
struction from monocular video. In IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pages 15598–
15607, 2021. 1
[65] Andrew Szot, Alex Clegg, Eric Undersander, Erik Wijmans,
Yili Zhao, John Turner, Noah Maestre, Mustafa Mukadam,
Devendra Chaplot, Oleksandr Maksymets, Aaron Gokaslan,
Vladimir Vondrus, Sameer Dharur, Franziska Meier, Wojciech
Galuba, Angel Chang, Zsolt Kira, Vladlen Koltun, Jitendra
Malik, Manolis Savva, and Dhruv Batra. Habitat 2.0: Training
home assistants to rearrange their habitat. In Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 2021. 7
[66] Chengzhou Tang and Ping Tan. Ba-net: Dense bundle adjust-
ment network. ArXiv, abs/1806.04807, 2018. 5
[67] Yijie Tang, Jiazhao Zhang, Zhinan Yu, He Wang, and Kai
Xu. Mips-fusion: Multi-implicit-submaps for scalable and
robust online neural rgb-d reconstruction. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2308.08741, 2023. 2
[68] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Droid-slam: Deep visual slam
for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. Advances in neural
information processing systems, 34:16558–16569, 2021. 1, 2,
5
[69] Fabio Tosi, Youmin Zhang, Ziren Gong, Erik Sandström,
Stefano Mattoccia, Martin R. Oswald, and Matteo Poggi.
How nerfs and 3d gaussian splatting are reshaping slam: a
survey, 2024. 2
[70] Hao Wang, Jun Wang, and Wang Liang. Online reconstruc-
tion of indoor scenes from rgb-d streams. In Proceedings
of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 3271–3279, 2016. 2
[71] Hengyi Wang, Jingwen Wang, and Lourdes Agapito. Co-
slam: Joint coordinate and sparse parametric encodings for
neural real-time slam, 2023. 2
[72] Peng Wang, Lingzhe Zhao, Ruijie Ma, and Peidong Liu. Bad-
nerf: Bundle adjusted deblur neural radiance fields. In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 4170–4179, 2023. 2, 3
[73] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P
Simoncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to
structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing,
13(4):600–612, 2004. 7
[74] Silvan Weder, Johannes Schonberger, Marc Pollefeys, and
Martin R Oswald. Routedfusion: Learning real-time depth
map fusion. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, pages 4887–4897, 2020. 1
[75] Silvan Weder, Johannes L Schonberger, Marc Pollefeys, and
Martin R Oswald. Neuralfusion: Online depth fusion in latent
space. In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pages 3162–3172, 2021. 1
[76] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dong Wang, Dan Xu, Zhigang Wang, Bin
Zhao, and Xuelong Li. Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d
gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2311.11700, 2023. 2
[77] Zhixin Yan, Mao Ye, and Liu Ren. Dense visual slam with
probabilistic surfel map. IEEE transactions on visualization
and computer graphics, 23(11):2389–2398, 2017. 2
[78] Lihe Yang, Bingyi Kang, Zilong Huang, Zhen Zhao, Xiao-
gang Xu, Jiashi Feng, and Hengshuang Zhao. Depth anything
v2. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.09414, 2024. 13
[79] Xingrui Yang, Hai Li, Hongjia Zhai, Yuhang Ming, Yuqian
Liu, and Guofeng Zhang. Vox-fusion: Dense tracking and
mapping with voxel-based neural implicit representation. In
IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
Reality (ISMAR), pages 499–507. IEEE, 2022. 1
[80] Xingrui Yang, Yuhang Ming, Zhaopeng Cui, and Andrew
Calway. Fd-slam: 3-d reconstruction using features and dense
matching. In 2022 International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), pages 8040–8046. IEEE, 2022. 2
[81] Vladimir Yugay, Yue Li, Theo Gevers, and Martin R. Os-
wald. Gaussian-slam: Photo-realistic dense slam with gaus-
sian splatting, 2023. 2

<!-- page 12 -->
[82] Ganlin Zhang, Erik Sandström, Youmin Zhang, Manthan
Patel, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R. Oswald. Glorie-slam:
Globally optimized rgb-only implicit encoding point cloud
slam, 2024. 2, 5, 13
[83] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman,
and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep
features as a perceptual metric. In Proceedings of the IEEE
conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, pages
586–595, 2018. 7
[84] Wei Zhang, Tiecheng Sun, Sen Wang, Qing Cheng, and Nor-
bert Haala. Hi-slam: Monocular real-time dense mapping
with hybrid implicit fields. IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 2023. 2
[85] Wei Zhang, Tiecheng Sun, Sen Wang, Qing Cheng, and Nor-
bert Haala. Hi-slam: Monocular real-time dense mapping
with hybrid implicit fields, 2023. 1, 2
[86] Youmin Zhang, Fabio Tosi, Stefano Mattoccia, and Matteo
Poggi. Go-slam: Global optimization for consistent 3d instant
reconstruction. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 3727–3737, 2023. 1,
2
[87] Lingzhe Zhao, Peng Wang, and Peidong Liu. Bad-gaussians:
Bundle adjusted deblur gaussian splatting. In European Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 233–250. Springer, 2025.
2, 3
[88] Yiming Zhao, Denys Rozumnyi, Jie Song, Otmar Hilliges,
Marc Pollefeys, and Martin R. Oswald. Human from blur:
Human pose tracking from blurry images. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision
(ICCV), pages 14905–14915, 2023. 2
[89] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hu-
jun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and Marc Polle-
feys. Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam.
In IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 12786–12796, 2022. 1
[90] Zi-Xin Zou, Shi-Sheng Huang, Yan-Pei Cao, Tai-Jiang Mu,
Ying Shan, and Hongbo Fu.
Mononeuralfusion: Online
monocular neural 3d reconstruction with geometric priors.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.15153, 2022. 1
[91] Matthias Zwicker, Hanspeter Pfister, Jeroen Van Baar, and
Markus Gross. Surface splatting. In Proceedings of the 28th
annual conference on Computer graphics and interactive
techniques, pages 371–378, 2001. 4

<!-- page 13 -->
Deblur Gaussian Splatting SLAM
Supplementary Material
6. Method Details
Hyperparameters.
We use 150 iterations for mapping
and 200 iterations for the frame-to-model tracking. We set
λ = 0.8, λSSIM = 0.2, λreg = 10. The learning rate for
the rotational relative pose is set to 3e −3 and 1e −3. We
keep the early stopping in the frame-to-model tracking when
the gradient goes under 1e −4, as introduced in [41] for
faster tracking. For the other hyperparameters please refer
to [41, 53, 82]
Keyframes Management. We use the keyframe window
as in MonoGS [41]. The keyframe selection is based on the
covisibility of the Gaussians. The covisibility between two
keyframes i, j, is defined using the Intersection over Union
(IoU) and Overlap Coefficient (OC):
IoUcov(i, j) = |Gi
v ∩Gj
v|
|Giv ∪Gj
v|
,
(18)
OCcov(i, j) =
|Gi
v ∩Gj
v|
min(|Giv|, |Gj
v|)
,
(19)
where Gi
v are the Gaussians visible in keyframe i. A Gaus-
sian is defined visible in a rasterization if the ray’s accumu-
lated transmittance α has not yet reached 0.5.
A keyframe i is added to the keyframe window KFs if,
given the last keyframe j, IoUcov(i, j) < kfcov or if the rela-
tive translation tij > kfm ˆDi, where ˆDi is the median depth
of the mid pose of frame i. For Replica we use kfcov = 0.95,
kfm = 0.04 and for TUM-RGBD [62] and ScanNet [10]
datasets, kfcov = 0.90, kfm = 0.08. The registered keyframe
j in KFs is removed if OCcov(i, j) < kfc, where keyframe i
is the latest added keyframe. For all datasets, the cutoff is
set to kfc = 0.3. The size of the keyframe window is set to
|KFs| = 10 for Replica and |KFs| = 8 for TUM-RGBD and
ScanNet.
Pruning and Densification. The Pruning and Densification
are done similarly to MonoGS [41]. Pruning in the system
is guided by visibility criteria. Newly inserted Gaussians
from the last three keyframes are discarded if they are not
observed by at least three other frames within the keyframe
window, but this process only occurs when the keyframe
window reaches its capacity. Additionally, for every 150
mapping iterations, a global pruning step removes Gaussians
with opacity below 0.7 or those with excessively large 2D
projections. Densification follows the method outlined in
[28] and is similarly performed every 150 mapping iteration.
To avoid forgetting Gaussian, while mapping the current
window, we select a few indices of past keyframes and add
Method
Metric
office0
Deblur-SLAM
(DepthAnything V2 [78])
sPSNR↑
30.06
sSSIM↑
0.87
sLPIPS↓
0.25
Deblur-SLAM
(Omnidepth [14])
sPSNR↑
30.40
sSSIM↑
0.87
sLPIPS↓
0.24
Table 6. Monocular Depth Estimator evaluation on Replica [60].
The results are almost equal, showing that there is not much differ-
ence between the two Monocular Depth Estimators. We selected
OmniDepth [14] being the most consistent, even in blurry frames.
them to the mapping optimization to preserve rendering
quality and geometry on the whole scene.
Refinement.
Following the method outlined in [53], on-
line global BA is conducted every 20 keyframes. We per-
form both the GlORIE-SLAM [82] trajectory refinement
and MonoGS [41] color refinement at the end of the online
optimization. We keep 26000 as the number of refinement
optimizations as in MonoGS.
Monocular Depth Estimator. We used OmniDepth [14] as
a Monocular Depth Estimator as employed in [53] to fill the
depth map where the multi-view is invalid. We have tried
Depth Anything v2 [78], but in our blurry setting, we found
OmniDepth to be more robust (Table 6).
Details on the Scale and Shift estimation. Following [53],
the scale θi and shift γi are initially estimated using least
squares fitting using:
{θi, γi} = arg min
θ,γ
X
(u,v)
 (θ (1/Dmono
i
) + γ) −dl
i
2 (20)
Disparity Maps Details.
For a given disparity map di
(separated into low and high error parts {dl
i, dh
i }) for frame
i, we denote the corresponding depth ˜Di = 1/di. Similar
to [53], pixel correspondences (u, v) and (ˆu, ˆv) between
keyframes i and j are established by warping (u, v) into
frame j with depth ˜Di as
pi = ωi ˜Di(u, v)K−1[u, v, 1]T , [ˆu, ˆv, 1]T∝Kω−1
j [pi, 1]T
(21)
The 3D point corresponding to (ˆu, ˆv) is computed from the
depth at (ˆu, ˆv) as
pj = ωj ˜Dj(ˆu, ˆv)K−1[ˆu, ˆv, 1]T
(22)
If the L2 distance between pi and pj is smaller than a thresh-
old, the depth ˜Di(u, v) is consistent between i and j. By
looping over all keyframes except i, the global two-view

<!-- page 14 -->
Figure 6. Qualitative results on averaged real-world TUM-RGBD data (f2/xyz) [62], in which we averaged 5 frames. Given the blurry
input frames, we can track the trajectory with sub-frame precision and estimate sharp maps by directly modeling the camera motion blur.
Method
Metric
M = 3
M = 6
M = 9
Deblur-SLAM
(Ours)
sPSNR↑
28.90
30.11
30.40
sSSIM↑
0.85
0.87
0.87
sLPIPS↓
0.29
0.25
0.24
Table 7.
Ablation on the number of virtual cameras on
office0 [60]. We observe that the rendering metrics increase
with the number of virtual cameras used. This indicates that more
virtual cams make the blur modeling more accurate and lead to
sharp renderings.
consistency ni can be computed for frame i as
ni(u, v) =
X
k∈KFs,k̸=i
1

∥pi −pk∥2 < η · avg
  ˜Di

(23)
Here, 1(.) is the indicator function, η ∈R≥0 is a hyperpa-
rameter, and ni is the total two-view consistency for pixel
(u, v) in keyframe i. Moreover, ˜Di(u, v) is valid if ni is
larger than a threshold.
7. Additional Experimental Results
Effect on the number of virtual views. We analyze the im-
pact of varying the number of virtual cameras in office0
to evaluate its influence on the rendering performance. As
shown in Table 7, our results reveal that an increasing the
number of virtual cameras consistently improves rendering
quality. This highlights the significance of optimizing the
number of virtual cameras to enhance the overall perfor-
mance of the system.
Ablation on features. In our study, we conducted a compre-
hensive ablation analysis on key components of our model
to demonstrate their individual contributions to overall per-
formance. The results, detailed in Table 8, clearly indicate
that our full method, incorporating physical blur modeling,
frame-to-frame tracking, Gaussian deformations, and final
refinement, surpasses all variants lacking one or more of
these elements in rendering quality. This emphasizes the in-
tegral role each component plays in enhancing our method’s
rendering capabilities, validating our approach of integrating
these techniques for optimal results.
Test on Blurry Real-World Dataset.
We averaged 5
frames for the TUM-RGBD dataset and 2 frames for the
Method
Physical
Blur Model
Frame-to-
Frame
Gaussian
Deformation
Refine-
ment
Metric
office0
MonoGS
[41]
sPSNR↑
25.30
✗
✗
✗
✓
sSSIM↑
0.82
sLPIPS↓
0.43
MonoGS
+ Deblurring
sPSNR↑
25.91
✓
✗
✗
✗
sSSIM↑
0.83
sLPIPS↓
0.40
Deblur-SLAM
No Deformation
No Refinement
sPSNR↑
28.23
✓
✓
✗
✗
sSSIM↑
0.84
sLPIPS↓
0.33
Deblur-SLAM
(Ours)
sPSNR↑
30.40
✓
✓
✓
✓
sSSIM↑
0.87
sLPIPS↓
0.24
Table 8. Ablation on the different features of our method on
office0 [60]. This table showcases the individual contributions
of various features in our method, demonstrating how each com-
ponent enhances overall performance and justifying our design
choice.
Method
Metric
Avg 3fr
Avg 5fr
Avg 7fr
SplatSLAM
[53]
PSNR↑
27.64
27.32
27.11
SSIM↑
0.88
0.87
0.88
LPIPS↓
0.14
0.17
0.17
sPSNR↑
20.44
17.61
20.18
sSSIM↑
0.68
0.59
0.66
sLPIPS↓
0.22
0.30
0.30
ATE↓
21.8
21.8
21.8
Deblur-SLAM
(Ours)
PSNR↑
27.26
27.00
25.90
SSIM↑
0.90
0.89
0.87
LPIPS↓
0.11
0.14
0.17
sPSNR↑
20.70
20.70
20.37
sSSIM↑
0.70
0.70
0.68
sLPIPS↓
0.18
0.21
0.26
ATE↓
0.2
0.2
0.2
Table 9. Rendering evaluation on custom f2/xyz [62] with
averaged frames. By averaging some frames to introduce blur,
we show that our method outperforms others in rendering metrics
for sharp images (denoted with the "s" prefix) as well as better
ATE. Deblur-SLAM achieves comparable results for the averaged
renderings metrics.
ETH3D dataset. On Table 9, we show that Deblur-SLAM
can outperform almost all the metrics. More specifically,
the better sPSNR, sSSIM, sLPIPS denote that our methods
successfully learn a sharper map. An example result in
comparison with SplatSlam [53] is depicted in Figure 6.

<!-- page 15 -->
Method
Metric
106_00
Deblur-SLAM Light
FPS [frame/s]↑
0.65
PSNR↑
22.90
Deblur-SLAM
FPS [frame/s]↑
0.36
PSNR↑
23.06
Table 10. Speed performances on ScanNet [10], compared to a
lighter version of our model with 120 iterations for mapping and
20 for frame-to-model tracking.
