<!-- page 1 -->
Online Language Splatting
Saimouli Katragadda1, Cho-Ying Wu2, Yuliang Guo2*, Xinyu Huang2, Guoquan Huang1, Liu Ren2
1University of Delaware, 2Bosch Research North America & Bosch Center for Artificial Intelligence (BCAI)
{saimouli,ghuang}@udel.edu
{Cho-Ying.Wu,yuliang.guo2,xinyu.huang,liu.ren}@us.bosch.edu
https://saimouli.github.io/onlineLang
RGB
LangSplat
Ours
Ours: 0.8 s/frame
LangSplat: 2.8 min/frame
Ours: 0.6 s/frame
LangSplat: 2.1 min/frame
“Tablet”
“Monitor”
Replica Dataset
TUM Dataset
Ground-Truth 
(GT) Box
Maximal Feature 
Response
(Outside GT box)
(At the border of 
secondary GT box)
Figure 1. We introduce an online language splatting framework that incrementally constructs a 3D Gaussian-based language feature map
using 3D Gaussian Splatting within a SLAM framework. Results are compared to the offline state-of-the-art LangSplat [35] across two
datasets, presented in two panels. For each panel, the left column displays rendered language feature maps, and the right column shows
target localization results. Our method not only outperforms in localization accuracy, but also achieve more than 40× improved efficiency.
Abstract
To enable AI agents to interact seamlessly with both humans
and 3D environments, they must not only perceive the 3D
world accurately but also align human language with 3D
spatial representations. While prior work has made signifi-
cant progress by integrating language features into geomet-
rically detailed 3D scene representations using 3D Gaus-
sian Splatting (GS), these approaches rely on computa-
tionally intensive offline preprocessing of language features
for each input image, limiting adaptability to new environ-
ments. In this work, we introduce Online Language Splat-
ting, the first framework to achieve online, near real-time,
open-vocabulary language mapping within a 3DGS-SLAM
system without requiring pre-generated language features.
The key challenge lies in efficiently fusing high-dimensional
language features into 3D representations while balancing
the computation speed, memory usage, rendering quality
and open-vocabulary capability. To this end, we innova-
*Corresponding Author.
tively design: (1) a high-resolution CLIP embedding mod-
ule capable of generating detailed language feature maps
in 18ms per frame, (2) a two-stage online auto-encoder that
compresses 768-dimensional CLIP features to 15 dimen-
sions while preserving open-vocabulary capabilities, and
(3) a color-language disentangled optimization approach
to improve rendering quality. Experimental results show
that our online method not only surpasses the state-of-the-
art offline methods in accuracy but also achieves more than
40× efficiency boost, demonstrating the potential for dy-
namic and interactive AI applications.
1. Introduction
Radiance Fields [16, 31, 38] have emerged as a transforma-
tive technology for 3D scene representation. Among them,
3D Gaussian Splatting (GS) [16] has become particularly
popular due to its high rendering quality and efficiency in
differentiable rendering research. While radiance fields pro-
vide detailed geometric and textured 3D representations for
photorealistic image rendering, they lack the semantic in-
formation necessary for interaction with humans.
1
arXiv:2503.09447v3  [cs.AI]  25 Sep 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
The integration of language features into 3D scene rep-
resentations has recently enabled open-vocabulary language
queries, improving both interpretability and interactivity in
human-computer interaction [17, 35, 41, 58]. For example,
LangSplat [35] embeds CLIP-based language features [36]
into 3DGS, including both RGB and language channels per
Gaussian. However, existing Lang-GS methods typically
rely on computationally intensive preprocessing to gener-
ate pixel-wise language features using multimodal founda-
tion models like SAM+CLIP, which can require minutes per
frame. This substantial computational overhead limits their
applicability to offline scenarios, where language features
must be precomputed for each frame.
While offline language mapping is sufficient for static,
predefined environments, many real-world applications de-
mand immediate scene understanding. For instance, a ser-
vice robot entering a new environment must quickly per-
ceive the 3D surroundings to follow commands, and aug-
mented reality (AR) systems need to deliver instant, inter-
active feedback as users explore new spaces. Recent ad-
vancements in combining Gaussian Splatting with online
mapping [5, 8, 14, 26, 55] have enabled detailed geometric
and textured maps to be created in near real-time. How-
ever, these approaches do not incorporate language fea-
tures, focusing solely on geometry and texture. Alterna-
tively, methods that use pre-annotated ground-truth seman-
tic maps [12, 20, 21] simplify the problem but are limited to
closed-vocabulary settings, lacking the flexibility required
for open-vocabulary commanding.
The key challenge in online 3D language mapping lies
in efficiently integrating language features into 3D repre-
sentations while preserving open-vocabulary capabilities.
To address this, we introduce Online Language Splat-
ting, the first framework to achieve near real-time, open-
vocabulary 3D language mapping within a SLAM-GS sys-
tem, eliminating the need for pre-generated language maps.
Fig. 1 illustrates the proposed framework.
In particular,
our method addresses three core sub-challenges: (1) Real-
time High-Resolution CLIP Embedding: Since offline,
segment-centric CLIP feature preparation is a major run-
time bottleneck, we replace it with a single-stage CLIP
embedding and a Super-Resolution Decoder (SRD) mod-
ule, enabling the generation of detailed, pixel-aligned CLIP
maps in 18 ms per frame (Sec. 4.1). (2) Open-Vocabulary-
Preserving Feature Compression in Novel Scenes: Un-
like offline methods, which allow feature compression mod-
ules to be trained on the test scene, online methods rely
on a pre-trained feature compressor to operate directly
on unseen data.
However, due to domain gaps, a sin-
gle pre-trained autoencoder may struggle to maintain open-
vocabulary capabilities when compressing CLIP features
for online mapping. To address this online-specific gener-
alization challenge, we introduce a two-stage autoencoder,
where the second stage, an Online-Learned AutoEncoder
(OLAE), dynamically adapts to the dominant data variance
of the current scene. This further reduces feature dimen-
sions while preserving critical information (Sec. 4.2). (3)
Color-Language Optimization: Existing Lang-GS sys-
tems jointly optimized color and language using the same
GS parameters, but these modalities inherently prefer dis-
tinct GS parameters (see Fig. 4). Prior work [35, 41, 58]
jointly optimized RGB and language using shared GS pa-
rameters, which failed to achieve optimal performance for
either modality. To address this, we disentangle RGB and
language backpropagation paths, designing a set of separate
GS parameters to effectively render high-quality outputs for
both modalities (Sec. 4.3).
Building on these designs, our extensive experiments
demonstrate that our approach not only surpasses prior
state-of-the-art (SoTA) offline Lang-GS methods in text-
queried 2D and 3D object localization and segmentation but
also delivers a 40× to 200× boost in efficiency.
In summary, the main contributions of this paper include:
• We introduce the first near real-time, open-vocabulary,
online language splatting framework, enabling flexible in-
teraction with human language.
• We tackle key challenges in online language splatting by
proposing a real-time high-resolution CLIP embedding,
an open-vocabulary-preserving feature compressor, and a
color-language disentangled optimization strategy.
• Through comprehensive evaluation, we demonstrate that
our method outperforms prior state-of-the-art offline ap-
proaches across most of key metrics while achieving over
40× efficiency gains.
2. Related Work
2.1. SLAM with Differentiable Rendering
Dense visual SLAM builds 3D maps in an online fash-
ion, typically using classical representations such as voxel
grids [4, 27, 28, 32, 51], Octrees [46, 47, 54], or point
cloud [1, 2, 15, 39, 40, 52].
In recent years, differen-
tiable rendering has gained popularity in SLAM, enabling
the joint optimization of camera poses, maps, and im-
plicit representations such as neural fields [10, 13, 38, 44,
48, 59] or explicit 3D Gaussians [5, 8, 9, 14, 26, 34, 55]
with manageable computational overhead.
In particular,
MonoGS [26] introduces a highly efficient pipeline for on-
line camera tracking and mapping with high-quality render-
ing [8], leveraging CUDA-based gradient updates to opti-
mize camera poses. While these methods excel in render-
ing quality and accurate camera pose estimation, they focus
solely on geometric and photometric optimization. We em-
phasize that our approach complements existing SLAM-GS
methods [14, 26, 34] by introducing a novel capability: 3D
open-vocabulary language mapping, extending the utility of
SLAM-GS systems for more interactive applications. For
further details refer to [? ].
2

<!-- page 3 -->
Online 3D Language Mapping
Incoming RGBD
Low-Resolution
High-Resolution CLIP Embedding
High-Resolution
Two-Stage Autoencoder
Generalized 
Encoder
CLIP Compression
Online 
Encoder
share 
xyz
3D Gaussian Map
Disentangled 
Optimization
Online 
Decoder
Generalized 
Decoder
CLIP Text Encoder
Find me “Stool”
Language-driven Object 
Localization
Pixel-wise 
CLIP Encoder
Super-Reso
Decoder
CLIP Decompression
Frozen Network
Online Trained
RGBD-optimal GS 
Inference Flow
Lang-optimal GS 
Training Flow
Figure 2. Online Language Splatting Pipeline. Our pipeline integrates 3D Gaussian Splatting with SLAM, using 3D Gaussians as the
sole mapping elements. Left: During training, raw images are processed through a High-Resolution (HR) CLIP embedding module,
which generates HR language features in real-time. These features are compressed via a two-stage CLIP compression module into low-
dimensional maps for efficient optimization while preserving open-vocabulary capabilities. RGB and language parameters are optimized
separately through disentangled optimization to accommodate distinct preference in update 3D Gaussian map. Right: At inference, the
rendered low-dimensional language map undergoes a two-stage decoding process to reconstruct the full-resolution CLIP feature map,
enabling open-vocabulary queries to locate target objects.
2.2. Language 3D Gaussian Splatting
Lang-GS methods [35, 41, 58] have recently emerged to in-
tegrate language mapping into the GS framework. Given
the effectiveness of GS, embedding both language features
and RGB channels into 3D Gaussians has been shown to
outperform previous NeRF-based methods [17] in both ac-
curacy and rendering efficiency. However, most of these
methods rely on offline-prepared language maps generated
by SAM+CLIP, leading to significant processing time for
open-vocabulary segmentation.
Some GS-SLAM meth-
ods [12, 20, 21] support semantic map rendering but sim-
plify the task by using dataset-provided semantic maps as
ground truth. This approach limits them to closed vocabu-
laries, contradicts the online nature of SLAM, and reduces
adaptability to new scenes. In contrast, our method is the
first to achieve online open-vocabulary 3D language map-
ping, enabling seamless adaptation to novel environments.
2.3. Open-Vocabulary Detection and Segmentation
Open-Vocabulary Detection (OV-D) and Segmentation
(OV-S) have gained traction with the advent of CLIP [36]
and large vision-language models, enabling natural lan-
guage prompts for querying.
OV-D typically employs
a large backbone encoder and probing heads to predict
bounding boxes and classes based on cosine similarity with
text embeddings [3, 19, 24, 29, 30, 50]. OV-S is more chal-
lenging, requiring fine-grained masks and pixel-level se-
mantics. The encoders for vision-language models gener-
ally suffer from limited bottleneck feature resolution [33,
36]. Many OV-S approaches [22, 35, 37, 45, 49, 56, 57] use
class-agnostic mask generation via proposal networks or
SAM [18], followed by vision-language model processing
on proposal regions. However, these methods are computa-
tionally intensive and unsuitable for online applications. As
a consequence, offline Lang-GS methods [35, 41, 58] adopt-
ing SAM-based CLIP input typically takes several minutes
per image on high-end GPUs to label language field ground-
truth. In contrast, we adopt a highly efficient OV-S encoding
approach [53] that directly embeds CLIP features into the
network’s bottleneck feature map at a low spatial resolution.
To overcome the spatial resolution for precise 3D language
mapping, our proposed SRD module not only reconstructs
high-resolution CLIP maps but operates in real-time.
3. Preliminaries
3DGS and Rendering
In 3D Guassian fields, each Gaus-
sian Gi, i ∈[1, N] is represented by its 3D world-coordinate
positions µi ∈R3, covariance matrix Σi ∈R3×3, colors
ci ∈R3, and opacity αi ∈R. We drop spherical harmon-
ics the same as in the prior online 3DGS [14, 26, 55]. The
pixel color C is rendered by front-to-back composition of
overlapping Gaussians sorted by depth:
C =
X
i∈N
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj) =:
X
i∈N
ciαiT
(1)
where T denotes the transmittance. Note that opacity αi
is after decay by the Gaussian function w.r.t. projected 2D
Gaussian: µ2D = KPµ, Σ2D = JRΣRT JT , where K is
the camera intrinsics, P is the world-to-camera projection
matrix, R is the rotation, and J is the Jacobian of the affine
approximation of the projective transformation.
3

<!-- page 4 -->
SLAM Tracking and Keyframing
We adopt tracking
and keyframing mechanism in MonoGS [26].
For each
tracked frame, current camera pose is optimized with ap-
pearance and geometry loss.
L = λ|Cr −Cgt| + (1 −λ)|Dr −Dgt|,
(2)
where Cr and Dr are rendered image and depth by alpha
composition in Eq. (1). (For depth rendering, the color term
is replaced by z-direction distance at the center of a Gaus-
sian.) Tracked frames are selected as keyframes within a
local window after a co-visibility check, ensuring sufficient
novel regions are visible in each keyframe and avoiding re-
dundant optimization. For each keyframe, new Gaussians
are created in the 3D maps with µ initialized by back-
projecting depth to cover the areas. The 3DGS parameters
are optimized by the maintained keyframe window with ap-
pearance and geometry loss Eq. (2) plus scale-isotropic reg-
ularization to prevent serious needle-like artifacts.
Multi-Channel Optimization
Prior work (e.g., [35]) that
embeds semantics or language features into 3DGS caches
additional channels per Gaussian. The language map ren-
dering follows alpha-blending rules:
F =
X
i∈N
fiαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj),
(3)
where fi ∈R3 is language feature in each Gaussian. Dur-
ing the backward pass, language gradients are entangled
with color and depth gradients:
∂L
∂αi = ∂L
∂C
∂C
∂αi + ∂L
∂D
∂D
∂αi + ∂L
∂F
∂F
∂αi ,
(4)
where the loss L is based on Eq.(2) with an additional
L1 loss using groundtruth language maps via SAM+CLIP.
Some works [12, 20, 21] use gradients in Eq.(4) to train
with multi-modality online. To not let language features in-
terfere with color Gaussians, LangSplat’s offline optimiza-
tion first trains color Gaussians on the whole sequence with-
out the last gradient term, and in the second stage they use
the last term to pass gradient to only train language features.
4. Online Language Splatting
Our approach enables near real-time, high-resolution,
Open-Vocabulary
(OV)
language
mapping
within
a
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) framework, facilitating
language-driven spatial understanding for robotics and AR
applications. As shown in Fig. 2, our pipeline consists of
three main components during the training and optimization
phase, addressing the key challenges outlined in Sec. 1.
The pipeline begins with standard RGB-D SLAM in-
put streams. Color images are processed through a pixel-
wise CLIP encoder to generate low-resolution language
Figure 3. Importance of Feature Map Resolution. Top: Com-
pared to the Low Resolution (LR) query heatmap from the pixel-
wise encoder output (left), the High Resolution (HR) heatmap
from SRD output (right) improves localization and differentiation.
Middle & Bottom: Query heatmaps from rendered maps after GS
mapping. GS mapping from LR exhibits feature bleeding, while
mapping from HR preserves structural details, better localization.
features. These features, combined with hierarchical en-
coder outputs, are then refined by a Super-Resolution De-
coder (SRD) to produce pixel-aligned, high-resolution lan-
guage maps.
Next, the CLIP Compression module, im-
plemented as a Two-Stage Autoencoder, significantly re-
duces the dimensionality of CLIP features for efficient on-
line mapping while preserving essential information for OV
queries. The second stage, an Online-Learned Autoencoder
(OLAE), further enhances generalization to novel scenes.
Finally, Disentangled Optimization separates gradient flows
for color and language, enabling independent optimization
of Gaussian parameters. This improves rendering quality
across both modalities. During inference, the rendered low-
dimensional language map can be passed through the Two-
Stage Autoencoder to reconstruct full CLIP features, allow-
ing OV queries for locating target objects.
4.1. High-Resolution CLIP Embedding
Unlike offline methods that require multiple passes and
complex mask generation,
our approach leverages a
ConvNeXt-based pixel-wise CLIP Encoder [53] to gener-
ate a coarse CLIP embedding map, which is then refined
by a lightweight Super-Resolution Decoder (SRD) to pro-
duce dense, high-quality language maps. This design pre-
serves conceptual integrity while enabling real-time oper-
ation. The SRD takes a coarse CLIP map along with the
intermediate outputs from layers 1 and 2 of the pixel-wise
encoder as inputs, progressively enhancing the CLIP fea-
ture map resolution through two convolutional upsampling
blocks that align with hierarchical encoder features. The
detailed architecture is illustrated in Supplemental Fig. 8.
The Super-Resolution Decoder (SRD) is trained with su-
4

<!-- page 5 -->
pervision from offline high-resolution CLIP feature maps.
Following a procedure similar to [35], we generate high-
resolution language features to serve as training labels for
our lightweight SRD. Our training is not restricted to a spe-
cific dataset, as we only require diverse images to cover a
broad range of concepts without relying on their original
annotations. When training images encompass diverse con-
cepts (e.g., COCO [23]), and our training focuses on the
simplified task of upsampling the feature map, the OV ca-
pability of the CLIP features is expected to be preserved.
The resulting high-resolution CLIP embedding module
(pixel-wise CLIP Encoder + SRD) operates highly effi-
ciently, achieving a runtime of 18 ms on an RTX-3090 GPU
while using only 1.6 GB of GPU memory. The SRD sub-
module contributes only 2 ms to this runtime, significantly
improving feature quality with minimal overhead. These
enhancements in turn result in improved accuracy and IoU
(see Table 1, Fig. 7). The benefits of high-resolution CLIP
maps are further illustrated at the feature level in Fig. 3.
Note that our SRD design shares certain similarities with
FeatUp [7], as both approaches focus on upsampling fea-
ture maps. However, unlike their unsupervised method, we
employ a simpler and more efficient strategy by using hi-
erarchical feature supervision to guide upsampling in a su-
pervised manner. Our approach not only enhances accuracy
for high-resolution images but also improves computational
efficiency (see supplemental Fig. 11 for comparison).
4.2. Two-Stage Online CLIP Compression
Since CLIP features are high-dimensional (768) vectors, a
key challenge is how to effectively compress them to enable
real-time integration while preserving OV capabilities.
To address this, we first develop a generalized language
compressor that exploits the inherent redundancy in lan-
guage feature embeddings. Using diverse images from a
large dataset (e.g., COCO), we train a simple autoencoder
baseline with a multi-layer MLP to compress the dimen-
sionality from 768 to a 32-dimensional code. This code
size is carefully chosen to balance semantic preservation
and data compression. Due to the domain gap between the
pretraining dataset and the test scenes, the output dimension
cannot be too low, as excessive compression may compro-
mise OV capabilities when applied to new domains. Sup-
plemental Table 11 provides a detailed analysis of code size
selection and its impact on performance.
While the generalized language compressor effectively
reduces dimensionality, the resulting code size remains
too large for efficient integration into an online Lang-GS
framework. To further compress the CLIP feature while
preserving their OV capability, we introduce an Online-
Learned AutoEncoder (OLAE) as a second-stage com-
pressor, which adapts dynamically to testing scenes by com-
pressing features into a smaller 15-dimensional code. This
Figure 4. Color optimization alone vs. color-language joint op-
timization. Adding language channels leads to sub-optimal ren-
dering quality with much different Gaussian maps.
adaptation is based on the observation that data variance
within a specific scene can often be captured by fewer di-
mensions, allowing less relevant directions from the gener-
alized model to be disregarded. The OLAE starts with an
initial training phase of 200 iterations (6 ms/iter) and incre-
mentally updates using selected keyframes. For each iter-
ation, two additional random keyframes are incorporated,
ensuring retention of previously learned features and pre-
venting catastrophic forgetting. By combining a general-
ized compressor (for broad vocabulary preservation) and an
online-learned compressor (for scene adaptability), our ap-
proach maintains OV capabilities while significantly reduc-
ing memory cost, making real-time applications feasible.
4.3. Color-Language-Disentangled Optimization
One of the key challenges in online 3DGS is how to op-
timizing color and language modalities in the meantime.
Prior methods like LangSplat use additional channels in
each Gaussian to represent language features, as described
in Sec. 3. Colors and language modality share the com-
mon 3DGS parameters, including α, µ, and Σ (or the
same scale S and rotation R). However, we find that shar-
ing the common parameters will lead to suboptimal perfor-
mance for both colors and language. To verify, we visual-
ize the Gaussian fields for training colors alone and jointly
optimizing RGB-L channels in Fig. 4. The color render-
ing deteriorates when jointly optimizing RGB-L. Observ-
ing Fig. 4, we find that this is because language features
tend to stretch Gaussian scales and apply different rotations.
Unlike color appearance with textural details, language fea-
tures are homogeneous, such as wall areas are associated
with the same language codes. Therefore, language Gaus-
sians prefer much different GS parameters from RGB.
Losses of color and language are chained to the same
GS parameters by Eq. (4), where ∂L/∂αi further back-
propagates to µ, R, S. However, if using different sets of
whole GS parameters, the number of Gaussians can be high
and takes up the memory, but the key rendering contribu-
tors could still be sparse. To efficiently represent colors and
5

<!-- page 6 -->
language, we adopt multi-mode R, S, and α for colors and
languages, and they still share the same µ in each Gaussian
to prevent Gaussian duplication. The color and language
rendering become
C =
X
i∈N
ciαc
i
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αc
j),
F =
X
i∈N
fiαf
i
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αf
j ), (5)
and for depth rendering we use αc. The back-propagation
becomes
∂L
∂αc
i
= ∂L
∂C
∂C
∂αc
i
+ ∂L
∂D
∂D
∂αc
i
,
∂L
∂αf
i
= ∂L
∂F
∂F
∂αf
i
,
(6)
∂L
∂Rc/f
i
=
∂L
∂αc/f
i
∂αc/f
i
∂Σc/f
i
∂Σc/f
i
∂Rc/f
i
,
∂L
∂Sc/f
i
=
∂L
∂αc/f
i
∂αc/f
i
∂Σc/f
i
∂Σc/f
i
∂Sc/f
i
,
(7)
where script c/f denotes different modes.
We empiri-
cally simplify the back-propagation path to ∂L/∂µ2D
i
by
only computing ∂L/∂αc
i × ∂αc
i/∂µ2D
i
without language.
MonoGS [26] further computes gradients to camera poses
(P ) by ∂µ2D
i
/∂P and ∂Σ2D
i
/∂P , and we also drop the
language part and only use color mode’s mean and covari-
ance for camera poses. For co-visibility check in keyfram-
ing, we require both colors and language are with sufficient
novel areas to join as keyframes. To prune a Gaussian, we
also require both αc
i and αf
i are below a threshold. Last, to
not let language mode learn skewed scales, we add a loss
|Sf
i −Sc
i⊥|, where ⊥denotes stop gradient.
5. Experiments
Baselines. Since we introduce the first online Language
Gaussian Splatting (Lang-GS) method, we primarily com-
pare our approach to state-of-the-art (SoTA) offline Lang-
GS methods, including LangSplat [35], Feature3DGS [58],
and LEGaussian [41]1 in text query-based object localiza-
tion. Additionally, to demonstrate that integrating language
mapping does not degrade SLAM system performance, we
compare our method against SoTA SLAM-GS approaches
in image rendering and camera pose tracking, including
MonoGS [26], SplaTAM [14], and RTG-SLAM [34].
Datasets.
We conduct evaluations on two widely used
datasets for the SLAM setup: the synthetic Replica [42] and
the challenging real-world TUM RGB-D [43], both qualita-
tively and quantitatively. In Replica, we evaluate the top 10
most frequent classes, sampling 21 frames randomly from
each sequence as test frames. In TUM RGB-D, we man-
ually annotate test frames to create ground-truth masks for
language queries, serving as evaluation targets. In train-
ing, we utilize COCO [23] and Omnidata [6] datasets due
to their diverse range of concepts, ensuring broad general-
ization across various scenes and objects.
1LEGaussian’s reported Replica results are based on re-annotated and
simplified groundtruth. We re-evaluate it for fair comparison.
Table 1. Comparison to Lang-GS SoTA on Replica. Our method
is compared to the SoTA Lang-GS methods on the Replica dataset
in terms of image-based localization accuracy and per-frame run-
ning time. We also analyze the impact of key introduced modules,
including Super-Resolution Decoder (SRD) in CLIP Embedding
and Online Learning of AutoEncoder (OLAE) in feature compres-
sion. The variants without OLAE train a single AE from other
scenes in Replica Dataset.
Method
Modules
Query Loc.
Time
SRD
OLAE
mIOU
Loc
LangSplat [35]
−
−
0.417
0.720
2.8 min/fr
Feature3DGS [58]
−
−
0.359
0.755
2.3 min/fr
LEGaussian [41]
−
−
0.245
0.682
32 s/fr
Ours
✗
✗
0.400
0.754
0.8 s/fr
COCO
✗
0.475
0.782
COCO
✓
0.479
0.759
Omni
✗
0.485
0.802
Omni
✓
0.487
0.826
Table 2. Comparison to Lang-GS SoTA on TUM RGB-D. Our
method is compared to the Lang-GS SoTA method LangSplat on
image-based localization accuracy and running time.
TUM RGB-D
Scene1
Scene2
Time
mIOU
Loc
mIOU
Loc
LangSplat [35]
0.646
0.850
0.538
0.7825
2.1 min/fr
Ours
0.599
0.917
0.535
0.7905
0.6 s/fr
Evaluation Metrics. To assess object localization via text
queries, we follow LangSplat to use mIoU and localiza-
tion accuracy (Loc) on rendered language maps. Localiza-
tion is considered successful if the highest-relevancy pixel
falls within the ground-truth bounding box. To evaluate im-
age rendering quality, we use PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS,
while camera pose tracking is assessed via ATE RMSE,
following the evaluation protocol in [26]. We exclude the
post-stage global refinement for strict online requirements.
Each method’s runtime is measured by per-frame process-
ing time. Besides these known metrics, we also evaluate
text-query 3D localization via Chamfer Distance (CD) and
Earth Mover’s Distance (EMD) between the ground-truth
and localized point sets.
Implementation Details.
We utilize a pre-trained CLIP
ViT-L model [36] alongside a ConvNeXt-L-based hierar-
chical encoder from [53] to extract 768-dimensional feature
representations from input images [25]. The input to this
module is an RGBD image with dimensions 640×640×3.
The module processes the input and produces a feature map
of size 24×24×768. Subsequently, the SRD enhances this
feature map to an output resolution of 192×192×768, main-
taining the semantic context of the input data. We train two
separate SRD models: one on 7% of the COCO dataset [23]
and another on 30% of the Omnidata-Tiny dataset [6]. Both
models are trained on four A5000 GPUs with a batch size
of 12 images per GPU. We utilize the AdamW optimizer
with an initial learning rate of 2 × 10−4 and a weight decay
6

<!-- page 7 -->
of 1 × 10−4 for a total of 180 training epochs. For the gen-
eralized auto-encoder, a 8-layer MLP architecture was used
to compress language features to a code size of 32. For the
online compressor, a 2 layer MLP with a encoder code of
size 15 is trained online using a scheduler with a reduction
on plateau and a threshold of 1 × 10−4, and optimized with
Adam using a learning rate of 1 × 10−3. The online train-
ing takes 10 key frames with 200 iterations in initialization,
and update 1 iteration in the consecutive frames. To ensure
a fair comparison, we upgrade LangSplat’s OpenCLIP [11]
model to match our feature dimensions (768, up from 512),
use a code size of 15 (from 3), and train the pipeline offline
on the entire Replica and TUM RGBD dataset, sampling
every 10th image from each sequence.
Figure 5. Qualitative comparison with offline SoTA: Top: On
the TUM RGB-D dataset, our method successfully segments the
paper in the top-right corner, which LangSplat fails to detect. Bot-
tom: On the Replica dataset, we accurately localize the carpet,
whereas LangSplat misidentifies a different object. Black box:
ground-truth box; red dot: maximal feature response as the pre-
dicted localization.
5.1. Comparison with the State of the Art
Comparison to Lang-GS SoTA Methods. The compari-
son between our method and previous SoTA offline Lang-
GS methods is presented in Table 1 and Table 2. As ob-
served, our method establishes a new SoTA performance on
the Replica dataset, significantly surpassing offline meth-
ods, regardless of whether SRD is trained on COCO or Om-
nidata datasets. It also leads to improved localization ac-
curacy and competitive mIoU scores on the TUM-RGBD
dataset upon LangSplat.
As an online method, our ap-
proach is 40× to 200× more efficient than SoTA offline
methods. A detailed per-scene evaluation on the Replica
dataset is provided in supplemental Table 7. Qualitatively,
Fig. 5 shows that our method correctly identifies objects that
LangSplat either misses or misidentifies. The ablation study
of key modules are further discussed in Sec 5.2.
On the other hand, our performance advantage on the
TUM-RGBD dataset is less pronounced. This is primar-
ily due to challenges such as motion blur and lower image
quality, which complicate online camera tracking. These
Table 3. SLAM-GS Evaluation on Replica. Our method is eval-
uated against other SLAM-GS approaches based on novel view
rendering quality and camera localization error (ATE in cm).
Method
Lang.
PSNR ↑SSIM ↑LPIPS ↓ATE (cm) ↓
SplaTAM [14]
✗
33.39
0.968
0.101
0.392
RTG-SLAM [34]
✗
35.77
0.982
0.106
0.182
MonoGS [26]
✗
35.72
0.950
0.075
0.420
Ours
✓
35.81
0.950
0.072
0.397
conditions favor offline approaches that rely on extensive
global optimization (e.g., 30k iterations) of both 3D Gaus-
sian parameters and camera poses.
Comparison to SLAM-GS SoTA Methods. We compare
our method to recent SoTA SLAM-GS approaches in Ta-
ble 3. As observed, despite integrating language feature
mapping into a SLAM-GS system, our framework preserves
novel view rendering performance and localization is on par
to MonoGS [26], the SLAM framework on which we build.
Compared to other SoTA SLAM-GS methods, our approach
achieves the best overall performance in novel view render-
ing while incorporating language mapping. RTG-SLAM
achieves superior ATE due to the inclusion of additional
classical SLAM modules, which increases system complex-
ity. Per-scene results are provided in supplemental Table 8.
3D Localization Evaluation.
For 3D localization, we
first fuse multi-view language renderings into voxels by
truncated signed distance field (TSDF). Each voxel size is
20cm. Then, we extract mesh by marching cubes. Each
vertex is described by language features.
We pass the
batched point features into the CLIP decompressor, recon-
struct the 768 dimensions, and compare with the mesh build
by TSDF with semantic mask groundtruth. We compare
with LangSplat on the devised 3D localization protocol. Ta-
ble 4 demonstrates that our framework can run in an online
setting with better 3D language mapping. Fig. 6 provides
visualization of the 3D localization. See the supplementary
Sec 14 for more results.
Table 4. 3D Localization Evaluation. Our online method is com-
pared to LangSplat in 3D localization from language query.
Method Online
3D Language Localization
cabinet
cushion
stool
rug
CD↓EMD↓CD↓EMD↓CD↓EMD↓CD↓EMD↓
LangSplat
✗
0.03 0.02
0.23 0.10
0.16 0.13
0.26 0.38
Ours
✓
0.04 0.05
0.55 0.03
0.20 0.40
0.26 1.49
Method Online
3D Language Localization
lamp
wall
ceiling
Average
CD↓EMD↓CD↓EMD↓CD↓EMD↓CD↓EMD↓
LangSplat
✗
1.64 38.3
0.14 0.18
0.55 0.30
0.43 5.63
Ours
✓
1.22 4.08
0.09 0.05
0.27 0.71
0.38 0.97
Runtime Analysis.
Our entire network module runs at
21ms per frame on an RTX-3090 GPU, including 15ms
for CLIP encoding, 2ms for super-resolution decoding, and
6ms for online compression with online training. While
7

<!-- page 8 -->
Groundtruth
Ours
LangSplat
Groundtruth
Ours
LangSplat
“Lamp”
“Rug”
“Cushion”
“Ceiling”
Figure 6. Visualization of 3D localization results.
the overall pipeline speed is currently bottlenecked by the
MonoGS baseline—resulting in a runtime of 0.6–0.8 sec-
onds per frame—significantly higher speeds are achievable
with advancements in the SLAM-GS system. For instance,
by integrating our method into Hi-SLAM [? ], we achieve
7.05 FPS. In contrast, the offline method LangSplat requires
approximately 168s per frame (2.8 minutes), including 35s
for SAM, 10s for post-processing, and an additional 123s
per frame (amortized) for training the dense CLIP autoen-
coder on the testing scene. This total runtime underscores
the significant computational cost of an offline approach.
5.2. Ablation Study
Super-Reso Decoder (SRD) in CLIP Embedding We an-
alyze the impact of SRD on the Replica dataset, with re-
sults summarized in Table 1 and individual scene results
provided in supplemental Table 7. We observe that SRD
significantly improves both mIoU and Loc metrics from our
basic online baseline. The underlying reasons for these im-
provements are evident through visual comparisons in Fig. 3
and Fig. 7. From Fig. 3, we can see that high-resolution
language maps greatly enhance localization of small or dis-
tant objects. Fig. 7 demonstrates improvements in seman-
tic boundaries and even helps resolve ambiguities between
visually similar but different classes. Cross-view consis-
tency: In a new ablation study, we found that the gener-
alized encoder improves cross-view consistency—without
it, the average cosine similarity drops to 0.5. While frame-
wise encoding alone cannot fully ensure cross-view consis-
tency, the globally optimized 3D map from Gaussian Splat-
ting (GS) inherently maintains consistency across views.
Table 5. Impact of Color-Language Disentanglement (disent.)
versus Joint Multi-Channel Optimization (joint).
Method
2D Loc.
3D Loc.
Image Rendering
Tracking
mIOU↑Loc↑EMD↓CD ↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE[cm]↓
Joint
0.323
0.633 0.384 1.940 31.23
0.901
0.197
0.796
Disent. 0.402
0.622 0.375 0.974 35.89
0.957
0.060
0.325
Online Learning of AutoEncoding (OLAE). The ablation
study on Online Learning of AutoEncoder (OLAE) in CLIP
Compression is summarized in Table 1 and supplemental
Table 7. To evaluate the effect of removing the online en-
Figure 7. Visual comparison in CLIP embedding: Our High-
resolution embedding allows for more complete object capture,
reducing holes and resolving semantic ambiguities. The dotted
black box represents the ground-truth, while the red dot indicates
the maximal feature response as the predicted localization.
coder strategy, we train a single autoencoder using 4-fold
cross-validation on the Replica dataset. In each fold, two
sequences are held out for testing, while the remaining se-
quences are used for training. This setup ensures that the
trained modules are exposed to data from the Replica do-
main while making that the testing scenes remain unseen.
As shown in Table 1, introducing OLAE even surpasses
the in-domain fine-tuned single autoencoder, demonstrating
its effectiveness in preserving semantic concepts upon com-
pression. A more detailed per-scene analysis (supplemen-
tal Table 7) further reveals: Although in-domain fine-tuned
pipelines tend to outperform on certain testing scenes simi-
lar to those observed during training, OLAE performs better
on novel scenes and shows higher overall stability across all
scenes. A more detailed ablation study on code size is pro-
vided in supplemental Sec. 12.1.
Color-Language Disentanglement. We evaluate the im-
pact of disentanglement by comparing it to joint multi-
channel optimization commonly used in other online multi-
modality learning frameworks [12, 20, 21]. This study uses
the Replica Room-0 subset to examine the design’s impact
on 2D / 3D localization accuracy, novel-view image ren-
dering quality and SLAM tracking errors (ATE [cm]), with
results shown in Table 5.
The results demonstrate that disentangling color and lan-
guage significantly enhances 2D mIoU, both 3D metrics,
color rendering, and camera tracking, while maintaining
comparable 2D localization performance. A more detailed
ablation study on the impact of GS parameters is provided
in supplemental Sec 13, confirming that this strategy en-
ables the two modalities to operate with their optimal GS
parameters, minimizing interference between them.
6. Conclusion
In this work, we introduce Online Language Splatting, a
framework that enables online language-aware 3D map-
8

<!-- page 9 -->
ping through key innovations.
First, a real-time Super-
Resolution Decoder (SRD) enhances CLIP embeddings,
generating detailed language maps. Second, an highly ef-
fective and efficient two-stage CLIP compression preserv-
ing open-vocabulary capabilities. Third, a color-language
disentangled optimization improves rendering quality for
both language and color images. Our experimental results
demonstrate that our online approach not only outperforms
offline SoTA Lang-GS methods, but also leads to orders of
magnitude efficiency improvement.
References
[1] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J G´omez Rodr´ıguez,
Jos´e MM Montiel, and Juan D Tard´os. Orb-slam3: An accu-
rate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and mul-
timap slam. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 37(6):1874–
1890, 2021. 2
[2] Daniele Cattaneo, Matteo Vaghi, and Abhinav Valada. Lcd-
net: Deep loop closure detection and point cloud registration
for lidar slam. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 38(4):2074–
2093, 2022. 2
[3] Tianheng Cheng, Lin Song, Yixiao Ge, Wenyu Liu, Xing-
gang Wang, and Ying Shan.
Yolo-world:
Real-time
open-vocabulary object detection.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 16901–16911, 2024. 3
[4] Angela Dai, Matthias Nießner, Michael Zollh¨ofer, Shahram
Izadi, and Christian Theobalt.
Bundlefusion: Real-time
globally consistent 3d reconstruction using on-the-fly surface
reintegration. ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), 36(4):
1, 2017. 2
[5] Tianchen Deng, Yaohui Chen, Leyan Zhang, Jianfei Yang,
Shenghai Yuan, Jiuming Liu, Danwei Wang, Hesheng Wang,
and Weidong Chen. Compact 3d gaussian splatting for dense
visual slam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11247, 2024. 2
[6] Ainaz Eftekhar, Alexander Sax, Jitendra Malik, and Amir
Zamir.
Omnidata: A scalable pipeline for making multi-
task mid-level vision datasets from 3d scans. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vi-
sion, pages 10786–10796, 2021. 6
[7] Stephanie Fu, Mark Hamilton, Laura E. Brandt, Axel Feld-
mann, Zhoutong Zhang, and William T. Freeman. Featup:
A model-agnostic framework for features at any resolution.
In The Twelfth International Conference on Learning Repre-
sentations (ICLR), 2024. 5, 12, 15
[8] Xinli Guo, Peng Han, Weidong Zhang, and Hongtian Chen.
Motiongs: Compact gaussian splatting slam by motion filter.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.11129, 2024. 2
[9] Jiarui Hu, Xianhao Chen, Boyin Feng, Guanglin Li,
Liangjing Yang, Hujun Bao, Guofeng Zhang, and Zhaopeng
Cui.
Cg-slam: Efficient dense rgb-d slam in a consistent
uncertainty-aware 3d gaussian field. In European Confer-
ence on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 93–112. Springer,
2024. 2
[10] Huajian Huang, Longwei Li, Hui Cheng, and Sai-Kit Yeung.
Photo-slam: Real-time simultaneous localization and photo-
realistic mapping for monocular stereo and rgb-d cameras. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 21584–21593,
2024. 2
[11] Gabriel Ilharco, Mitchell Wortsman, Ross Wightman, Cade
Gordon,
Nicholas Carlini,
Rohan Taori,
Achal Dave,
Vaishaal Shankar, Hongseok Namkoong, John Miller, Han-
naneh Hajishirzi, Ali Farhadi, and Ludwig Schmidt. Open-
clip, 2021. 7, 14
[12] Yiming Ji, Yang Liu, Guanghu Xie, Boyu Ma, Zongwu Xie,
and Hong Liu. Neds-slam: A neural explicit dense semantic
slam framework using 3d gaussian splatting. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 8
[13] Mohammad Mahdi Johari, Camilla Carta, and Franc¸ois
Fleuret. Eslam: Efficient dense slam system based on hybrid
representation of signed distance fields. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 17408–17419, 2023. 2
[14] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallab-
hula, Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan,
and Jonathon Luiten. Splatam: Splat track & map 3d gaus-
sians for dense rgb-d slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 21357–21366, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 7, 14
[15] Maik Keller, Damien Lefloch, Martin Lambers, Shahram
Izadi, Tim Weyrich, and Andreas Kolb.
Real-time 3d re-
construction in dynamic scenes using point-based fusion. In
International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 1–8.
IEEE, 2013. 2
[16] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering.
ACM Transactions on Graphics
(ToG), 2023. 1
[17] Justin Kerr, Chung Min Kim, Ken Goldberg, Angjoo
Kanazawa, and Matthew Tancik. Lerf: Language embed-
ded radiance fields.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF In-
ternational Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages
19729–19739, 2023. 2, 3
[18] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao,
Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-
head, Alexander C Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, et al.
Segment
anything.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 4015–4026,
2023. 3
[19] Weicheng Kuo, Yin Cui, Xiuye Gu, AJ Piergiovanni, and
Anelia Angelova.
Open-vocabulary object detection upon
frozen vision and language models. In The Eleventh Inter-
national Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR),
2023. 3
[20] Linfei Li, Lin Zhang, Zhong Wang, and Ying Shen. Gs3lam:
Gaussian semantic splatting slam.
In Proceedings of the
32nd ACM International Conference on Multimedia, pages
3019–3027, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 8
[21] Mingrui Li, Shuhong Liu, Heng Zhou, Guohao Zhu, Na
Cheng, Tianchen Deng, and Hongyu Wang. Sgs-slam: Se-
mantic gaussian splatting for neural dense slam. In Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 163–
179. Springer, 2024. 2, 3, 4, 8
9

<!-- page 10 -->
[22] Feng Liang, Bichen Wu, Xiaoliang Dai, Kunpeng Li, Yinan
Zhao, Hang Zhang, Peizhao Zhang, Peter Vajda, and Diana
Marculescu. Open-vocabulary semantic segmentation with
mask-adapted clip. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 7061–7070, 2023. 3
[23] Tsung-Yi Lin, Michael Maire, Serge Belongie, James Hays,
Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, Piotr Doll´ar, and C Lawrence
Zitnick. Microsoft coco: Common objects in context. In Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 740–
755. Springer, 2014. 5, 6
[24] Shilong Liu, Zhaoyang Zeng, Tianhe Ren, Feng Li, Hao
Zhang, Jie Yang, Qing Jiang, Chunyuan Li, Jianwei Yang,
Hang Su, et al.
Grounding dino:
Marrying dino with
grounded pre-training for open-set object detection. 2024.
3
[25] Zhuang Liu, Hanzi Mao, Chao-Yuan Wu, Christoph Feicht-
enhofer, Trevor Darrell, and Saining Xie. A convnet for the
2020s. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition (CVPR), pages 11976–
11986, 2022. 6
[26] Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul HJ Kelly, and An-
drew J Davison. Gaussian splatting slam. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), pages 18039–18048, 2024. 2, 3,
4, 6, 7, 14
[27] John McCormac, Ronald Clark, Michael Bloesch, Andrew
Davison, and Stefan Leutenegger.
Fusion++: Volumetric
object-level slam. In 2018 international conference on 3D
vision (3DV), pages 32–41. IEEE, 2018. 2
[28] Maxime Meilland and Andrew I Comport. On unifying key-
frame and voxel-based dense visual slam at large scales.
In 2013 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 3677–3683. IEEE, 2013.
2
[29] Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, Austin Stone, Maxim
Neumann, Dirk Weissenborn, Alexey Dosovitskiy, Aravindh
Mahendran, Anurag Arnab, Mostafa Dehghani, Zhuoran
Shen, et al. Simple open-vocabulary object detection. In
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages
728–755. Springer, 2022. 3
[30] Matthias Minderer, Alexey Gritsenko, and Neil Houlsby.
Scaling open-vocabulary object detection. Advances in Neu-
ral Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS), 36, 2024. 3
[31] Thomas M¨uller, Alex Evans, Christoph Schied, and Alexan-
der Keller. Instant neural graphics primitives with a mul-
tiresolution hash encoding. ACM Transactions on Graphics
(ToG), pages 102:1–102:15, 2022. 1
[32] Richard A Newcombe, Shahram Izadi, Otmar Hilliges,
David Molyneaux, David Kim, Andrew J Davison, Pushmeet
Kohi, Jamie Shotton, Steve Hodges, and Andrew Fitzgib-
bon. Kinectfusion: Real-time dense surface mapping and
tracking. In IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), pages 127–136. IEEE, 2011. 2
[33] Maxime Oquab, Timoth´ee Darcet, Th´eo Moutakanni, Huy
Vo, Marc Szafraniec, Vasil Khalidov, Pierre Fernandez,
Daniel Haziza, Francisco Massa, Alaaeldin El-Nouby, et al.
Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision.
Transactions on Machine Learning Research (TMLR), 2024.
3
[34] Zhexi Peng, Tianjia Shao, Yong Liu, Jingke Zhou, Yin Yang,
Jingdong Wang, and Kun Zhou. Rtg-slam: Real-time 3d re-
construction at scale using gaussian splatting. In ACM SIG-
GRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, pages 1–11, 2024. 2, 6, 7,
14
[35] Minghan Qin, Wanhua Li, Jiawei Zhou, Haoqian Wang, and
Hanspeter Pfister. Langsplat: 3d language gaussian splat-
ting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 20051–
20060, 2024. 1, 2, 3, 4, 5, 6, 13, 15, 16
[36] Alec Radford, Jong Wook Kim, Chris Hallacy, Aditya
Ramesh, Gabriel Goh, Sandhini Agarwal, Girish Sastry,
Amanda Askell, Pamela Mishkin, Jack Clark, et al. Learn-
ing transferable visual models from natural language super-
vision.
In International conference on machine learning
(ICML), pages 8748–8763. PMLR, 2021. 2, 3, 6
[37] Tianhe Ren, Shilong Liu, Ailing Zeng, Jing Lin, Kunchang
Li, He Cao, Jiayu Chen, Xinyu Huang, Yukang Chen, Feng
Yan, et al. Grounded sam: Assembling open-world models
for diverse visual tasks. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.14159,
2024. 3, 13
[38] Antoni Rosinol, John J Leonard, and Luca Carlone. Nerf-
slam: Real-time dense monocular slam with neural radiance
fields. In 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intel-
ligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 3437–3444. IEEE,
2023. 1, 2
[39] Erik Sandstr¨om, Yue Li, Luc Van Gool, and Martin R Os-
wald. Point-slam: Dense neural point cloud-based slam. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision (ICCV), pages 18433–18444, 2023. 2
[40] Thomas Schops, Torsten Sattler, and Marc Pollefeys. Bad
slam: Bundle adjusted direct rgb-d slam. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 134–144, 2019. 2
[41] Jin-Chuan Shi, Miao Wang, Hao-Bin Duan, and Shao-
Hua Guan.
Language embedded 3d gaussians for open-
vocabulary scene understanding.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 5333–5343, 2024. 2, 3, 6, 13,
15
[42] Julian Straub, Thomas Whelan, Lingni Ma, Yufan Chen, Erik
Wijmans, Simon Green, Jakob J Engel, Raul Mur-Artal, Carl
Ren, Shobhit Verma, et al. The replica dataset: A digital
replica of indoor spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797,
2019. 6
[43] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cre-
mers. A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems.
In Proc. of the International Conference on Intelligent Robot
Systems (IROS), 2012. 6
[44] Edgar Sucar, Shikun Liu, Joseph Ortiz, and Andrew J Davi-
son. imap: Implicit mapping and positioning in real-time. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International conference on
computer vision (ICCV), pages 6229–6238, 2021. 2
[45] Shuyang Sun, Runjia Li, Philip Torr, Xiuye Gu, and Siyang
Li. Clip as rnn: Segment countless visual concepts without
10

<!-- page 11 -->
training endeavor. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 13171–13182, 2024. 3
[46] Emanuele Vespa, Nikolay Nikolov, Marius Grimm, Luigi
Nardi, Paul HJ Kelly, and Stefan Leutenegger.
Efficient
octree-based volumetric slam supporting signed-distance
and occupancy mapping.
IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 3(2):1144–1151, 2018. 2
[47] Emanuele Vespa, Nils Funk, Paul HJ Kelly, and Stefan
Leutenegger.
Adaptive-resolution octree-based volumetric
slam. In 2019 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV),
pages 654–662. IEEE, 2019. 2
[48] Hengyi Wang, Jingwen Wang, and Lourdes Agapito. Co-
slam: Joint coordinate and sparse parametric encodings for
neural real-time slam.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pages 13293–13302, 2023. 2
[49] Haoxiang Wang, Pavan Kumar Anasosalu Vasu, Fartash
Faghri, Raviteja Vemulapalli, Mehrdad Farajtabar, Sachin
Mehta, Mohammad Rastegari, Oncel Tuzel, and Hadi
Pouransari. Sam-clip: Merging vision foundation models to-
wards semantic and spatial understanding. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 3635–3647, 2024. 3
[50] Jiong Wang, Huiming Zhang, Haiwen Hong, Xuan Jin, Yuan
He, Hui Xue, and Zhou Zhao. Open-vocabulary object detec-
tion with an open corpus. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), pages
6759–6769, 2023. 3
[51] Thomas Whelan, Michael Kaess, Hordur Johannsson, Mau-
rice Fallon, John J Leonard, and John McDonald. Real-time
large-scale dense rgb-d slam with volumetric fusion. The In-
ternational Journal of Robotics Research, 34(4-5):598–626,
2015. 2
[52] Thomas Whelan, Stefan Leutenegger, Renato F Salas-
Moreno, Ben Glocker, and Andrew J Davison. Elasticfusion:
Dense slam without a pose graph. In Robotics: science and
systems (RSS), page 3. Rome, Italy, 2015. 2
[53] Bin Xie, Jiale Cao, Jin Xie, Fahad Shahbaz Khan, and
Yanwei Pang.
Sed: A simple encoder-decoder for open-
vocabulary semantic segmentation.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 3426–3436, 2024. 3, 4, 6
[54] Binbin Xu, Wenbin Li, Dimos Tzoumanikas, Michael
Bloesch, Andrew Davison, and Stefan Leutenegger. Mid-
fusion: Octree-based object-level multi-instance dynamic
slam. In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (ICRA), pages 5231–5237. IEEE, 2019. 2
[55] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dan Xu, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong
Wang, and Xuelong Li. Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d
gaussian splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
pages 19595–19604, 2024. 2, 3
[56] Haobo Yuan, Xiangtai Li, Chong Zhou, Yining Li, Kai Chen,
and Chen Change Loy. Open-vocabulary sam: Segment and
recognize twenty-thousand classes interactively.
In Euro-
pean Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pages 419–
437. Springer, 2024. 3
[57] Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Xueyan Zou, Shilong Liu, Chunyuan
Li, Jianwei Yang, and Lei Zhang. A simple framework for
open-vocabulary segmentation and detection. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV), pages 1020–1031, 2023. 3
[58] Shijie Zhou, Haoran Chang, Sicheng Jiang, Zhiwen Fan, Ze-
hao Zhu, Dejia Xu, Pradyumna Chari, Suya You, Zhangyang
Wang, and Achuta Kadambi. Feature 3dgs: Supercharging
3d gaussian splatting to enable distilled feature fields.
In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 21676–21685,
2024. 2, 3, 6, 13, 15
[59] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hu-
jun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and Marc Polle-
feys. Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vi-
sion and pattern recognition (CVPR), pages 12786–12796,
2022. 2
[60] Xueyan Zou, Jianwei Yang, Hao Zhang, Feng Li, Linjie Li,
Jianfeng Wang, Lijuan Wang, Jianfeng Gao, and Yong Jae
Lee.
Segment everything everywhere all at once.
Ad-
vances in neural information processing systems (NeurIPS),
36:19769–19782, 2023. 15
11

<!-- page 12 -->
Online Language Splatting
Supplementary Material
7. Super-Resolution Decoder Architecture
We illustrate the detailed network architecture of our super-
resolution decoder, as shown in Fig. 8. Since the design
only includes low-cost CNN layers, this module achieves
real-time. Together with the pixel-wise CLIP encoder, they
compose the real-time high-resolution CLIP embedding
module adopted in our online language splatting frame-
work.
For training, we use a combination of losses to
ensure high-resolution feature quality and semantic coher-
ence. The loss function is defined as:
L = 0.8 · Lcosine + LL1 + 0.01 · LTV,
• LL1 is the L1 loss, computed as:
LL1 = 1
N
N
X
i=1
|ypred −ygt| ,
• Lcosine is the cosine similarity loss, computed as:
Lcosine = 1 −
ypred · ygt
∥ypred∥∥ygt∥,
• LTV is the total variation loss, computed as:
LTV =
X
i,j
|ypred(i, j) −ypred(i, j + 1)|
+
X
i,j
|ypred(i, j) −ypred(i + 1, j)| .
where ypred is the predicted high-resolution feature map,
and ygt is the ground-truth feature map. The LTV loss
penalizes spatial discontinuities to ensure smoothness [7].
SRD is supervised using labels that are created from
SAM-generated masks. For each image, multiple points
are sampled, clustered, and refined to produce the most ac-
curate mask, which is then propagated consistently across
the labels. We train the model on the COCO and Omni
datasets, leveraging hierarchical features and supervised la-
bels to help the network learn to associate boundaries and
propagate information effectively. This enables the network
to produce high-quality, generalizable language features.
8. Comparison to Language-GS SoTA methods
on Replica Per Scene
We present the complete comparison to Language-GS SoTA
methods on each scene of Replica Dataset in Table 7. As ob-
served, our method achieve overall SoTA in both mIOU and
Figure 8. Super-Resolution Decoder (SRD) Architecture. The
architecture consists of multiple layers designed to transform low-
resolution input features into high-resolution outputs. The pro-
cess begins with Upsample Blocks, each composed of convo-
lutional layers, batch normalization (BN), ReLU activation, and
ConvTranspose layers for spatial upscaling. After successive up-
sampling with the fusion of encoder intermediate layers’ outputs,
the output passes through a final convolutional block and sigmoid
activation to produce the high-resolution feature map. This de-
coder refines low-resolution language features into detailed, pixel-
aligned high-resolution maps for enhanced spatial understanding.
Table 6. Top 10 Labels Used for Evaluation in Each Scene of
the Replica Dataset.
Scene
Top 10 Labels
Office0 wall, rug, table, blinds, sofa, tv-screen, chair, floor, door, bin
Office1 wall, floor, pillow, blanket, blinds, desk, desk-organizer, monitor, table,
chair
Office2 wall, floor, table, sofa, panel, cushion, chair, tv-screen, bottle, tissue-
paper
Office3 floor, table, wall, window, chair, sofa, tablet, cushion, door, switch
Office4 wall, floor, chair, ceiling, window, bench, panel, tv-screen, table, clock
Room0 wall, window, floor, sofa, cushion, table, rug, lamp, book, indoor-plant
Room1 wall, window, blinds, floor, blanket, lamp, ceiling, comforter, night-
stand, picture
Room2 wall, chair, floor, plate, vase, window, table, indoor-plant, rug, shelf
LOC cross all scenes. On the ohter hand, certain inconsis-
tency is also observed cross views. This may stem from
varying domain gaps between testing scene and AE pre-
training domains. The online AE, pretrained on the COCO
and fine-tuned online, exhibits consistent results. In con-
trast, rows 1 and 2 (ours w/o online) use AEs trained on
other Replica scenes, where greater divergence from the
testing scene may cause inconsistency.
For evaluation, we utilize the following top 10 labels per
scene:
12

<!-- page 13 -->
Table 7. Comprehensive evaluation on language mapping quality across Replica scenes. Our method is evaluated against offline SoTA
Lang-GS methods on the Replica dataset. We also analyze the impact of our key modules: Super-Resolution Decoder (SRD) and Online
Learned AutoEncoder (OLAE) in CLIP Compression. Specifically, for versions requiring in-domain fine-tuning, two scenes from each
column are held as testing scenes, while the remaining scenes are used for training. best , second-best ]
Method
Modules
Room0
Room1
Room2
Office0
Time
SRD
OLAE
mIOU
Loc
mIOU
Loc
mIOU
Loc
mIOU
Loc
LangSplat [35]
−
−
0.356
0.710
0.393
0.718
0.413
0.694
0.353
0.526
2.8 m/fr
Feature3DGS [58]
−
−
0.487
0.677
0.301
0.812
0.353
0.800
0.342
0.661
2.3 m/fr
LEGaussian [41]
−
−
0.346
0.801
0.259
0.544
0.270
0.662
0.082
0.651
32.1 s/fr
Ours
✗
✗
0.320
0.716
0.498
0.838
0.405
0.760
0.397
0.761
0.8 s/fr
COCO
✗
0.405
0.788
0.554
0.850
0.497
0.832
0.457
0.805
COCO
✓
0.389
0.773
0.493
0.832
0.576
0.833
0.454
0.758
Omni
✗
0.414
0.706
0.499
0.876
0.534
0.860
0.405
0.737
Omni
✓
0.552
0.810
0.505
0.939
0.493
0.824
0.433
0.774
Method
Modules
Office1
Office2
Office3
Office4
Time
SRD
OLAE
mIOU
Loc
mIOU
Loc
mIOU
Loc
mIOU
Loc
LangSplat [35]
−
−
0.345
0.648
0.436
0.773
0.411
0.776
0.433
0.728
2.8 m/fr
Feature3DGS [58]
−
−
0.254
0.495
0.387
0.863
0.337
0.879
0.414
0.854
2.3 m/fr
LEGaussian [41]
−
−
0.354
0.414
0.178
0.680
0.267
0.943
0.204
0.766
32.1 s/fr
Ours
✗
✗
0.219
0.502
0.450
0.830
0.481
0.838
0.431
0.790
0.8 s/fr
COCO
✗
0.272
0.393
0.570
0.847
0.553
0.919
0.492
0.824
COCO
✓
0.357
0.525
0.574
0.820
0.495
0.766
0.498
0.765
Omni
✗
0.388
0.674
0.610
0.889
0.455
0.802
0.455
0.802
Omni
✓
0.357
0.734
0.522
0.826
0.578
0.887
0.458
0.812
9. Comparison to SLAM-GS SoTA methods on
Replica Per Scene
We present the complete SLAM-GS evaluation results for
each scene in Table 8. As observed, although our method in-
corporates additional open-vocabulary language mapping,
it maintains the novel view rendering quality of the base-
line MonoGS. Overall, our approach achieves state-of-the-
art (SoTA) performance in PSNR and LPIPS metrics.
10. Open-Vocabulary Evaluation
We compare our method with other offline Lang-GS meth-
ods using GPT-generated labels on Replica. We use GPT-4o
with the following prompt: ”Describe the image with 5 vo-
cabularies for each image to test object segmentation.” We
randomly select 30 images from 8 Replica sequences and
generate labels, which are then used as prompts to query
objects for these images. To generate segmentation masks
and ground truth, we use Grounded SAM [37], leveraging
the GPT-selected open-vocabulary (OV) labels as queries.
The evaluation results, comparing our method against of-
fline SoTA Lang-GS methods, are presented in Table 10.
While our method ranks secondary to LangSplat, it still out-
performs Feature3DGS and LEGaussian by large margins
and operates over 40× faster, highlighting its efficiency and
strong open-vocabulary segmentation performance.
We found that the key factors determining generalization
capability to open-vocabulary (OV) objects is the resolu-
tion of feature maps used for GS mapping. As observed,
the GPT-generated labels include many tiny objects such
as “thermostat”, “wall outlet”, and “digital clock”, which
are difficult to detect in low-resolution feature maps (See
Fig. 10 for examples.) Our method operates at a spatial
resolution (192×192) using SRD, which is much higher
compared to the pixel-wise encoder output (32x32), but re-
mains constrained by the speed requirement for online in-
tegration of language features into 3DGS. This resolution
may pose challenges for detecting tiny objects, however it
provides a significant advantage in running speed, making
our approach suitable for online SLAM applications. In
contrast, LangSplat operates at full-resolution feature maps
(1200×680), embedding them directly into 3DGS, which
enhances tiny object detection but comes at the cost of a
much slower runtime, making it unsuitable for real-time
SLAM applications.
We acknowledge tiny object detection as a limitation of
our current approach and discuss it further as part of our
future work in Sec. 15.
Additionally, we evaluate the open-vocabulary segmen-
tation of our model to determine whether it preserves the
ability to segment objects using novel textual descriptions
as prompts beyond the original COCO vocabulary.
To
test this, we randomly sample 100 COCO test images and
use ChatGPT (GPT-4o) to generate semantically richer de-
13

<!-- page 14 -->
Table 8. Per Scene Evaluation of SLAM-3DGS on Replica. Our method is evaluated against other SLAM-3DGS approaches based on
novel view rendering quality and camera localization error (ATE in cm). [Key: best , second-best ]
Method
w/ Lang.
Room0
Room1
Room2
Office0
PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓
SplaTAM [14]
✗
32.31
0.974
0.072
0.47
33.36
0.966
0.101
0.42
34.78
0.983
0.073
0.32
38.16
0.982
0.084
0.46
RTG-SLAM [34]
✗
31.56
0.967
0.131
0.20
34.21
0.979
0.105
0.18
35.57
0.981
0.115
0.13
39.11
0.990
0.068
0.22
MonoGS [26]
✗
33.36
0.941
0.086 0.458 33.58
0.942
0.086 0.424 34.12
0.950
0.081 0.490 40.91
0.980
0.045 0.615
Ours
✓
33.38
0.940
0.085 0.325 33.46
0.941
0.079 0.416 34.35
0.952
0.075 0.483 40.91
0.978
0.048 0.550
Method
w/ Lang.
Office1
Office2
Office3
Office4
PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓PSNR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓ATE↓
SplaTAM [14]
✗
38.49
0.980
0.095
0.24
31.66
0.962
0.102
0.28
29.24
0.948
0.123
0.39
31.54
0.946
0.157
0.56
RTG-SLAM [34]
✗
40.24
0.992
0.075
0.12
33.54
0.981
0.128
0.22
36.48
0.984
0.117
0.20
35.43
0.982
0.109
0.19
MonoGS [26]
✗
39.77
0.976
0.049 0.327 33.81
0.907
0.114 0.341 35.17
0.954
0.058 0.303 35.02
0.952
0.082 0.405
Ours
✓
39.60
0.976
0.044 0.382 33.05
0.901
0.125 0.396 34.98
0.955
0.053 0.203 36.75
0.957
0.063 0.423
Figure 9. Open-vocabulary segmentation. Left: COCO ground
truth segmentation. Right: Segmentation output of our module
using GPT-generated novel vocabulary prompt.
scriptions for each label, such as replacing ”car” with ”fu-
turistic electric vehicle with a sleek design”.
Using our
trained model, which leverages CLIP-based feature repre-
sentations, we generate segmentation masks for both the
COCO labels and the GPT-generated descriptions.
The
model achieves an mIoU of 0.389 with COCO labels and
0.392 with GPT labels (Table 9, demonstrating that it main-
tains segmentation performance regardless of textual vari-
ation. The qualitative results (Fig. 9 compare the COCO
ground-truth segmentation with our model’s segmentation
using GPT-generated novel descriptions. The results sup-
port the ability to generalize beyond COCO labels. These
findings confirm that despite being trained on COCO for
upsampling, the model effectively operates in an open-
vocabulary setting.
Table 9. Comparison of mIoU performance using COCO dataset
labels and ChatGPT-generated novel vocabulary on 100 randomly
sampled test images. The similar mIoU scores indicate that our
method preserves CLIP’s open-vocabulary capabilities.
Method
mIOU
COCO labels
0.389
GPT novel labels
0.392
11. More Visualizations
In this section, we provide additional visualization results
in Figs. 12- 18. To ensure a fair comparison, we increase
LangSplat’s code size from 3 to 15 and upgrade Open-
CLIP’s [11] feature dimension from 512 to 768.
Details of heat map results and evaluation metrics.
We display 2D heat maps as query results throughout this
work.
For each text query, LangSplat generates three
Gaussian relevancy language features, while our method
produces pixel-level language features through our high-
resolution model. To calculate localization and IoU metrics
and reduce the impact of outliers, similar to LangSplat, we
apply a mean convolution filter with a kernel size of 20 to
smooth the values in the language feature maps. The final
score is determined by selecting the maximum relevancy
score.
We used a score threshold of 0.4 for LangSplat and 0.5
for our method. We tuned the threshold that shows the best
14

<!-- page 15 -->
Figure 10. Examples of GPT-generated object labels and masks from Grounded SAM.
Table 10. Comparison on GPT-generated labels for Replica.
[Key: best , second-best ]
Method
GPT-labels
FeatureMap Res.
Time
mIOU
Loc
LangSplat [35]
0.660
0.880
1200×680
2.8 min/fr
Feature3DGS [58]
0.489
0.600
480×360
2.3 min/fr
LEGaussian [41]
0.241
0.703
184×110
32 s/fr
Ours
0.539
0.765
192×192
0.8 s/fr
Figure 11. We provide a visual comparison for feature maps by
FeatUP [7], the open-vocabulary segmentor from SEEM [60], and
our HR module. As observed, despite its simplicity, our HR mod-
ule achieves the highest feature quality at the lowest cost and
fastest speed. We believe our simple and highly effective design
provides valuable new insights. Black box: groundtruth.
object boundaries for each method for a fair comparison.
Values below the threshold are classified as background,
and those above it generate binary maps.
Table 11. Comparison of various language code sizes on Replica
Office0 (Of0) and Room2 (Rm2) sequences.
Size
128
64
32
20
Rm2
MSE
0.0064
0.0065
0.0065
0.0068
MAE
0.0497
0.0502
0.0505
0.0620
Cosine Sim.
0.9817
0.9764
0.9690
0.9000
Of0
MSE
0.0059
0.0060
0.0068
0.0074
MAE
0.0439
0.0445
0.0484
0.0570
Cosine Sim.
0.9823
0.9750
0.8790
0.7600
Table 12. Comparison of IOU and Localization (Loc) accuracy
across different code sizes (15, 6, 3) for Replica Office3 (Of3) and
Office4 (Of4) sequences.
Code Size
Of3 IOU
Of3 Loc
Of4 IOU
Of4 Loc
15
0.495
0.766
0.498
0.765
6
0.485
0.708
0.490
0.701
3
0.480
0.690
0.487
0.693
12. Language Compression
12.1. Study on Code Size
We study the generalizability of autoencoder code sizes
trained on COCO and tested on Replica sequences (Room2
(Rm2) and Office0 (Of0)) (see Table 11), evaluating recon-
struction quality using Mean Squared Error (MSE), Mean
Absolute Error (MAE), and Cosine Similarity. MSE mea-
sures the squared differences between original and recon-
structed features, MAE quantifies the absolute deviation,
and Cosine Similarity assesses the alignment of feature vec-
tors. As the code size decreases, we observe an increase in
errors, which is expected due to the trade-off between com-
pactness and information retention. Smaller code sizes cre-
15

<!-- page 16 -->
Table 13. Comparison on 3D localization evaluation. We counts a query as failure when a distance is larger than the CD/EMD’s
population mean plus 2× population standard deviation. Failures are excluded from the average and reported separately. Of: Office; Rm:
Room from the Replica Dataset.
Average CD
Of0
Of1
Of2
Of3
Of4
Rm0
Rm1
Rm2
Overall
CD Failure CD Failure CD Failure CD Failure CD Failure CD Failure CD Failure CD Failure CD Total count
LangSplat [35] 1.175
1
0.764
3
1.232
1
0.828
1
1.450
1
0.942
1
1.044
1
0.342
1
0.972
10
Ours
0.620
1
0.922
3
0.804
1
0.284
1
1.380
0
0.657
1
0.582
2
0.567
1
0.736
10
Average EMD
Of0
Of1
Of2
Of3
Of4
Rm0
Rm1
Rm2
Overall
EMD Failure EMD Failure EMD Failure EMD Failure EMD Failure EMD Failure EMD Failure EMD Failure EMD Total count
LangSplat [35] 7.369
2
4.745
4
2.949
1
5.512
1
17.42
2
4.549
1
3.824
2
4.109
2
6.310
15
Ours
1.574
1
2.292
5
9.001
1
7.949
1
9.157
1
1.498
1
13.987
1
0.100
3
5.695
14
Table 14. Comparison of 1-stage and 2-stage methods
Scene
1-stage (768 →15) Offline
2-stage (768 →32 Pretrained, 32 →15 Online)
Room0
0.514, 0.835
0.552, 0.810
Room1
0.427, 0.839
0.505, 0.939
Room2
0.396, 0.801
0.493, 0.824
Office0
0.422, 0.761
0.433, 0.774
Office1
0.409, 0.802
0.522, 0.826
Mean
0.434, 0.808
0.501, 0.835
ate more compact feature representations but often reduce
structural detail and granularity in the reconstructed lan-
guage feature maps, leading to losses in semantic and spa-
tial accuracy. This happens because smaller latent spaces
constrain the feature encoding, causing a loss of fine-
grained variations that are essential for precise language-
based localization. To balance accuracy and computational
efficiency, we choose code 32, which retains sufficient se-
mantic fidelity while remaining efficient for real-time appli-
cations.
We evaluate the impact of varying the code size of
the online encoder-decoder on IOU and Localization (Loc)
metrics using Replica sequences. See Table 12. To bal-
ance memory and ensure real-time feasibility, we limit the
maximum code size to 15. Online training improves adapt-
ability by fine-tuning representations for specific sequences,
but its effectiveness depends on the code size. Smaller code
sizes constrain the latent space, leading to a loss of fine-
grained details and limiting the benefits of online training.
In contrast, a code size of 15 strikes a balance between com-
pression and capacity, allowing the model to leverage online
adaptability while preserving semantic and spatial accuracy.
12.2. Online Compression
Table 14 presents a comparison between single-stage and
two-stage compression methods across multiple scenes.
Table 15. Effects of disentangling GS parameters into color
and language modes.
Disentangled Mode
Image Rendering
Separate α
Separate R
Separate S
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
✗
✗
✗
31.23
0.901
0.197
✗
✓
✓
31.79
0.915
0.177
✓
✗
✗
31.75
0.918
0.180
✓
✓
✗
32.80
0.929
0.146
✓
✗
✓
33.57
0.939
0.118
✓
✓
✓
35.89
0.957
0.060
The results indicate that the two-stage method generally
offers improvements in both mIOU and localization accu-
racy, with certain scenes like Room1 demonstrating more
noticeable gains (mIOU from 0.427 to 0.505 and localiza-
tion accuracy from 0.839 to 0.939). While the single-stage
method is simpler and more memory-efficient, it may lose
important language features due to aggressive compression
(768D directly to 15D). Conversely, the two-stage method
introduces an intermediate compression stage, preserving
these language features but at the cost of increased com-
plexity. Therefore, the choice between these two methods
ultimately depends on the user’s specific requirements and
constraints regarding accuracy versus resource utilization.
16

<!-- page 17 -->
13. Detailed Study on Disentanglement GS Pa-
rameters
First, as a more detailed version of the 3D localization eval-
uation compared to Table 5, we present per-class evaluation
results in Table 16. As observed, the disentangled optimiza-
tion leads to better overall performance and significant im-
provements on some classes.
Next, we study different strategies in GS parameter dis-
entanglement, including separating α, R and S into color
and language modes. In the forward rendering, we splat 3D
Gaussians onto the 2D space and conduct alpha composi-
tions using respective mode parameters to render color and
languages.
In the back-propagation, if α is disentangled into color
(c) and language (f) modes, we then calculate gradients by
∂L
∂αc
i
= ∂L
∂C
∂C
∂αc
i
+ ∂L
∂D
∂D
∂αc
i
,
∂L
∂αf
i
= ∂L
∂F
∂F
∂αf
i
,
(8)
where
∂L
∂αc
i and
∂L
∂αf
i further propagates to Ri and Si via
the world-coordinate 3D covariance matrix Σc/f
i
. If α is
not disentangled, the gradient terms in Eq. (8) are added
together.
The same rule applies to Ri and Si. If it is disentangled,
its color or language mode’s gradients are separately com-
puted from (added or separated)
∂L
∂αi . If not, its gradients
are added by both color and language modes.
Results shown in Table 15 validates that disentangling
R, S, and α works the best to preserve the highest image
quality. Comparing the fourth and fifth rows, one can also
find disentangling {α, S} has better effects than {α, R}.
This echoes the observation in the main paper Fig. 4: lan-
guage mode prefers larger scales to cover more areas that
belong to the same language codes, compared with color
rendering that needs smaller Guassians to represent finer
textures. Thus, disentangling S shows better performances.
As a further discussion, disentangling the world-coordinate
3D mean µ will produce much more Gaussians that attempt
to fit in color and language views separately. The setting
consumes
68% more memory than disentangling R, S,
and α and cannot finish training on a Replica sequence on a
RTX-3090 GPU.
14. More 3D Localization Evaluation
Following the 3D localization experiment in the main pa-
per, we show more 3D localization evaluation on the 8
sequences of the Replica Dataset.
We adopt top-10 fre-
quent categories in each sequence including objects and
area, counted by visible pixels.
Quantitative results are
provided in Table 13. Note that language label ambiguity
exists in Replica’s annotations. For instance, in the ”tv-
screen” example in Fig. 20, the groundtruth only counts in
the border areas and leaves out the center display areas as
”undefined”. Another example is in Fig. 19 the ceiling ar-
eas exclude the lights, which is also ambiguous in defining
the ceiling regions. This can result in significantly larger
point cloud distances, as measured by the CD and EMD
metrics, when queries return objects that do not align with
the definitions of the annotation system. To alleviate this,
for CD and EMD, we set a threshold that directly counts a
query as failure, when a distance exceeds the metric’s pop-
ulation mean plus 2× population standard deviation. The
failures are excluded from the average and reported sepa-
rately as counts of failure. Results are shown in Table 13.
Our method performs better than LangSplat on overall CD/
EMD with equal or smaller failure counts.
In Fig. 19 and 20, we visualize more 3D localization
results by language queries, which extend Fig. 6 in the main
paper with the same TSDF procedure to reconstruct meshes.
15. Limitations and Future Work
This work focuses on static scenes, which may limit its ap-
plicability to dynamic environments where objects or spa-
tial configurations change over time. Additionally, both our
method and LangSplat are susceptible to false positives for
objects that are visually or semantically similar. We no-
tice, for smaller objects SAM generated masks tends to pro-
duce more crisp results, whereas for room-sized objects our
method shows better localization accuracy due to globally
trained pixel-wise CLIP embedding.
In future work, we aim to extend our approach to dy-
namic scenes by incorporating mechanisms to handle tem-
poral changes and object motion.
Additionally, we plan
to explore uncertainty quantification for language features
to better evaluate and communicate the reliability of pre-
dictions. This improvement would enhance practical use
cases, such as robotic navigation and interaction, where
confidence in localization is critical.
17

<!-- page 18 -->
Table 16. Effects of Disentangled GS Parameters (Category-Wise). Here, we show category-wise results for language-queried 3D
localization on the Replica Room-0 subset.
Method
3D Language Query
cabinet
cushion
stool
rug
lamp
wall
ceiling
Average
CD ↓EMD↓CD ↓EMD↓CD↓
EMD↓CD↓
EMD↓CD↓
EMD↓CD↓
EMD↓CD↓
EMD↓CD↓
EMD↓
Joint RGB-L 0.042 0.019
1.252 3.022
0.128 0.007
0.283 0.866
0.579 9.517
0.110 0.118
0.295 0.033
0.384 1.940
Disentangled 0.040 0.053
0.554 0.032
0.196 0.399
0.256 1.494
1.222 4.083
0.087 0.050
0.269 0.707
0.375 0.974
18

<!-- page 19 -->
Figure 12. Our method is able to identify and segment all of the chairs, while LangSplat was only able to segment only two chairs.
Figure 13. Comparison of segmentation results for the query ”Table”. LangSplat successfully segments the table, while our method focuses
on the table top instead, leading to a segmentation error. This discrepancy is considered a failure case for our approach.
19

<!-- page 20 -->
Figure 14. Both methods demonstrate 3D consistency. The top-right zoom-in image shows the vase from another frame. Our model, due
to its 3D consistency, successfully detects the vase from only very limited appearance in the current frame. This highlights the ability of
our method to handle occlusions or partial appearance effectively.
Figure 15. Comparison of floor segmentation results. LangSplat introduces outliers by incorrectly segmenting walls as part of the floor. In
contrast, our method accurately segments the floor without including such outliers.
20

<!-- page 21 -->
Figure 16. Comparison of plate segmentation. LangSplat fails to detect the plate, whereas our method successfully identifies and segments
the plate on the table.
21

<!-- page 22 -->
Figure 17. Comparison of ”Keyboard” query localization on TUM-RGBD.
Figure 18. Comparison of ”Game Controller” query localization on TUM-RGBD.
22

<!-- page 23 -->
Figure 19. Comparison of 3D localization by queries on Replica sequences.
23

<!-- page 24 -->
Figure 20. (Continue) Comparison of 3D localization by queries Replica sequences.
24
