<!-- page 1 -->
1
Gaussian Splatting as a Unified Representation for
Autonomy in Unstructured Environments
Dexter Ong, Yuezhan Tao, Varun Murali, Igor Spasojevic, Vijay Kumar, Pratik Chaudhari
Abstract—In this work, we argue that Gaussian splatting is
a suitable unified representation for autonomous robot navi-
gation in large-scale unstructured outdoor environments. Such
environments require representations that can capture complex
structures while remaining computationally tractable for real-
time navigation. We demonstrate that the dense geometric and
photometric information provided by a Gaussian splatting repre-
sentation is useful for navigation in unstructured environments.
Additionally, semantic information can be embedded in the
Gaussian map to enable large-scale task-driven navigation. From
the lessons learned through our experiments, we highlight several
challenges and opportunities arising from the use of such a
representation for robot autonomy.
I. INTRODUCTION
Robots navigating large outdoor spaces with minimal visual
structure face significant challenges in perception, mapping,
and decision-making. In environments such as those in Fig. 1,
traditional approaches often struggle to capture the complexity
and variability of the scene, presenting challenges for au-
tonomous navigation under such conditions. These capabilities
are crucial for applications such as precision agriculture [1],
forestry [2], search-and-rescue [3] and infrastructure inspec-
tion [4]. To address this, we present Gaussian splatting as a
versatile representation for large-scale autonomy in unstruc-
tured outdoor environments.
Gaussian splatting offers several advantages for represent-
ing unstructured environments. Its dense representation can
effectively capture thin objects and complex geometries and
offers a good balance between dense representations like
point clouds and more discretized structures found in mesh
and voxel-based approaches. Moreover, Gaussian splatting
supports representing the environment as a semantic feature
field, enabling dense semantic features that facilitate clustering
based on semantics rather than purely geometric information.
This capability is particularly valuable for real-time scene
understanding in unstructured environments and for providing
context for executing under-specified tasks in the wild where
the maps are unknown a priori.
In this paper, we demonstrate that Gaussian splatting can
capture the necessary semantic and geometric information to
serve as a unified representation for exploration, semantic
navigation, and collision avoidance. We highlight four key
capabilities of our Gaussian splatting-based approach:
This work was supported by TILOS under NSF Grant CCR-2112665,
IoT4Ag ERC under NSF Grant EEC-1941529, the ARL DCIST CRA
W911NF-17-2-0181, DSO National Laboratories and NVIDIA. All authors are
with GRASP Laboratory, University of Pennsylvania {odexter, yztao,
mvarun, igorspas, kumar, pratikac}@seas.upenn.edu.
Figure 1: Robot navigating outdoor environments that lack structure in
semantics and geometry.
1) We introduce an efficient metric for estimating un-
certainty
in
the
Gaussian
splatting
map,
enabling
information-driven exploration of the environment. This
allows robots to autonomously identify and investigate
areas of high uncertainty, improving the completeness and
accuracy of the map.
2) We present a hierarchical mapping and planning frame-
work built on language-embedded Gaussian splatting.
This enables task-driven semantic navigation, allowing
robots to interpret high-level commands and navigate
based on semantic understanding of the environment.
3) Our system leverages GPU-based collision checking in
a dense Gaussian splatting map for trajectory planning,
enabling efficient collision avoidance in complex envi-
ronments.
4) To address the challenges of mapping large-scale environ-
ments, we present a submapping framework for Gaussian
splatting with particular considerations for autonomy.
This framework enables efficient mapping and collision
checking of Gaussians in expansive outdoor spaces, mak-
ing our approach scalable to real-world applications.
By integrating these capabilities, our Gaussian splatting-based
approach provides a unified map representation for mapping,
planning, and collision avoidance in large-scale and unstruc-
tured outdoor environments.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Map Representations
Volumetric maps & semantic maps. In robotics, various
map representations have been developed to effectively model
the environment. Volumetric representations, such as voxel-
based methods, are widely used for maintaining information
like occupancy [5] or signed distance fields [6, 7]. Metric-
semantic maps combine geometric and semantic information,
offering actionable representations of environments. Common
forms include semantics-augmented occupancy maps [8, 9],
arXiv:2505.11794v1  [cs.RO]  17 May 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
2
object-based semantic maps [10], and 3D scene graphs [11]–
[14]. Scene graphs are useful for capturing semantic concepts
and relationships through a compact representation [11]–[13].
Recent work extend hierarchical representations with language
features for open-vocabulary scene understanding [15]–[18].
However, these methods are limited to structured environ-
ments, prompting the need for a balance between sparse
hierarchical representations and dense feature embeddings for
unstructured environments.
Gaussian splatting. Learned map representations from
the computer vision field, including Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRF) [19] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [20], have
become more common in robotics applications. The concept
of 3D Gaussian splatting, as introduced in [20], offers a
unique method for capturing geometry using Gaussians while
incorporating color and opacity information, enabling high-
quality scene rendering. Building on this, several approaches
construct these maps in real time using color and depth
measurements within Simultaneous Localization and Mapping
(SLAM) frameworks. The work proposed in [21] utilizes
silhouette masks for efficient rendering optimization. The work
in [22] handles Gaussian parameters differently for color and
depth rendering, resulting in a more memory-efficient scene
representation, and [23] focuses on estimating stability and
uncertainty for efficient scene representation. The work in
[24] presents a framework for constructing semantic Gaussian
splatting maps from multiple agents. Gaussian splatting has
also emerged as a promising representation of the environment
in the context of active mapping [25, 26], which tries to
minimize the uncertainty of the map (and in some cases the
state of the robot) by optimizing the sequence of actions taken
by the robot. Typically, the exact measure of the reduction
in uncertainty is challenging to estimate exactly; this work
advocates for a method of uncertainty quantification that has
not been leveraged in previous works. Additionally, numerous
methods [27] integrate language-embedded 3DGS for scene
understanding, typically extracting 2D language features from
models like CLIP [28] and distilling them into 3D Gaussians.
To address mapping of larger scenes in a SLAM setting,
the work in [29, 30] incrementally create submaps and only
optimize Gaussians in the latest submap. The work presented
in this paper explores the capabilities of Gaussian splatting for
autonomy in unstructured environments.
B. Task-driven Navigation
Information-driven exploration. Autonomous exploration
describes the process of a robot that generates plans to actively
construct a map of an unknown environment. While both
frontier-based exploration [31]–[34] and information-driven
exploration [35]–[39] have been widely studied, the definition
of frontiers is tightly coupled with the grid-based representa-
tion such as occupancy maps and Signed Distance Field (SDF)
maps. With the recent advances in the learned map representa-
tions, the concept of information-driven exploration has been
adopted to evaluate the information [26, 40]–[42]. However,
most of the existing approaches still require the existence
of a grid-based representation for navigation goal generation,
the evaluation of information, or the subsequent planning.
Unlike these existing frameworks, our work proposes a unified
framework for mapping and planning for information-driven
exploration using Gaussian splitting as the representation.
Semantic navigation. Semantic navigation and task-driven
planning addresses the challenge of completing semantically-
driven tasks, such as efficiently locating objects. Recent work
[43] use hierarchical scene graphs with Large Language
Models (LLMs) for semantic search, while others use LLMs
to aid in frontier selection [25]. Other approaches such as
[44] utilize reinforcement learning with scene graphs for end-
to-end navigation policies. In [45], Vision-Language Models
(VLMs) are used to evaluate frontiers by task relevancy, while
[46] employed LLMs to select robot behaviors minimizing
task completion time. Unlike these approaches that focus
primarily on task completion with minimal mapping, our work
emphasizes creating dense, reusable maps applicable across
various tasks.
III. GAUSSIAN SPLATTING FOR AUTONOMY
This section summarizes our past work [47, 48] utilizing
Gaussian splatting as a unified representation for navigation.
We highlight key capabilities that leverage the strengths of
Gaussian splatting to enable autonomous exploration, mapping
and planning in unstructured outdoor environments.
A. Gaussian splatting
Gaussian splatting represents scenes with 3D Gaussians.
Each Gaussian has associated parameters position, orientation,
scale, opacity, and color. In this work, we also embed language
features as additional Gaussian parameters. The differentiable
rendering process projects these 3D Gaussians into 2D space
efficiently by leveraging the GPU, enabling real-time radiance
field construction and rendering. For a given camera pose,
corresponding RGB, depth and language feature images can be
rendered from the scene. The Gaussian parameters are updated
by computing a loss against the original observations. Unlike
NeRFs and other implicit radiance field representations, 3DGS
offers an explicit representation that is well-suited for real-
time mapping applications. This explicit nature makes 3DGS
particularly advantageous for tasks such as collision avoidance,
where immediate and direct access to spatial information is
crucial.
B. Robot autonomy overview
We adopt the traditional mapping and planning pipeline
for autonomy. The mapping module integrates visual and
pose measurements into the Gaussian splatting map. A task-
dependent metric is used to identify areas in the map with
high utility. The high-level planning module computes a path
based on cost-benefit analysis of utility and distance for the
robot to follow. The low-level planning module determines
safe trajectories through the Gaussians. An overview of such
a system is presented in Fig. 2. More details of such systems
are presented in [47, 48].
Platform.
We develop this autonomy system for the
Clearpath Jackal robot. It is equipped with an AMD Ryzen

<!-- page 3 -->
3
Figure 2: Overview of the autonomy framework.
Figure 3: Novel-view rendering from the onboard Gaussian splatting map and the corresponding groundtruth observations.
5 3600 processor and RTX 4000 Ada SFF graphics card. The
robot’s perception system includes an Ouster OS1 LiDAR and
a ZED 2i stereo camera.
C. Submapping for large-scale navigation
As the robot navigates the environment and incrementally
builds a map of Gaussians, the number of Gaussians can
quickly grow to the order of millions of Gaussians. This
poses a problem for both storage of the map on the GPU
and querying the Gaussians for collision checking. To this
end, we incorporate submapping into our mapping system.
Particular considerations are made to enable this submapping
structure to work seamlessly with the Gaussian splatting map-
ping framework. The submapping framework addresses two
objectives – submap-level pose graph updates and memory-
efficient mapping.
Submap management. Submaps contain an anchor pose
and the parameters of the associated Gaussians. The positions
of the Gaussians are stored relative to the anchor pose of the
corresponding submap. A submap is initialized if there are
no existing submap anchors within a radius of the robot’s
current position. When updating the map with SLAM, it is
difficult to update every pose since this may cause significant
inconsistencies in the shifted Gaussians. Instead, we perform
updates on the submap-level. This maintains the geometric
consistency of the Gaussians within each submap.
Local map management. To ensure that the number of
Gaussians on GPU remains manageable, the submaps are
dynamically loaded and unloaded as the robot moves. To
ensure safe and efficient navigation, we compute a local map
radius which depends on both the perception range of the
sensors and also the minimum distance from the robot at which
Gaussians must be considered for collision. Any submaps
within the local map radius from the robot are loaded on GPU,
while the rest are off-loaded to the CPU. This significantly
reduces the GPU memory requirement to maintain the map
as well as the computation required for collision checking.
In Tab. I, we show that our method allows for memory-
efficient Gaussian splatting in large environments where other
methods fail due to excessive memory requirements. Methods

<!-- page 4 -->
4
105
106
107
102
103
Number of Gaussians
Time (ms)
Figure 4: Time required to test for collisions of trajectories with a 5m horizon
(140 points) with respect to the number of Gaussians.
Table I: Comparison of memory performance on scene 00824 of the HM3D
dataset. Results from [47].
Method
Memory Allocated / Reserved (GB)
2m submap
5m submap
No submap
Gaussian-SLAM [30]
5.71 / 36.21
×
×
LoopSplat [29]
9.03 / 21.33
×
×
SplaTAM [21]
–
–
13.36 / 16.32
ATLAS [47]
8.28 / 9.68
9.77 / 12.51
13.36 / 16.32
that do not support submapping are indicated by – and
are not evaluated with submaps. Similarly, × indicates that
the method failed due to excessive memory requirements.
Gaussian-SLAM and LoopSplat are evaluated with submaps.
Additionally, we show in Fig. 4 the importance of managing
the number of Gaussians to enable fast collision checking for
real-time operation.
D. Collision avoidance in a Gaussian splatting map
While representations such as voxel grids have been popular
options for detecting obstacles due to the discretization of
the map [49], we show that the GPU can be leveraged for
fast collision checking in a dense representation [48]. Other
work on collision checking in Gaussian Splatting such as [50]
rely on the construction of safe flight corridors. Instead, we
find that a exhaustive check in the local map is sufficient. We
use a motion primitive library [51] to generate collision-free
trajectories through the Gaussian map and develop a GPU-
accelerated approach for checking collision against all the
Gaussians in the local map. In particular, in the traditional
process of growing the tree of motion primitives, collision
checks for each motion primitive are carried out sequentially.
During the process of generating each primitive, test points are
sampled, and collision checks are conducted between each test
point and obstacles in the map. To accelerate this process, we
first generate all motion primitives at the current level of the
search tree and sample all test points from them. Subsequently,
only one collision check is invoked between all test points
with all Gaussians that are being considered. The result of the
collision test for each motion primitive can be obtained by
Table II: Geometric exploration and mapping results using [48].
Methods
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
RMSE ↓
[dB]
[m]
Ensemble
11.02
0.351
0.710
1.897
FisherRF [26]
17.18
0.655
0.408
0.676
RT-GuIDE [48]
18.63
0.736
0.319
0.415
executing a logical OR operation for test points that belong to
the primitive.
IV. INFORMATION-DRIVEN EXPLORATION
Unlike traditional mapping representations, the Gaussian
map does not explicitly encode occluded or free space. Instead
of relying on frontiers of unobserved regions, we propose in
RT-GuIDE [48] an efficient metric for estimating uncertainty
in the Gaussian splatting map to determine areas that should
be explored next.
A. Uncertainty estimation
We calculate the change in Gaussian parameters during each
mapping optimization and use the magnitude of these param-
eter updates as an estimate of uncertainty. This simple metric
reveals an interesting behaviour that balances exploration and
exploitation. Gaussians with limited observations or those
at the edges of observed regions exhibit higher uncertainty,
which supports exploration. In contrast, areas of the map that
have been visited but contain unstable Gaussians necessitate
revisitation, which encourages exploitation.
B. Planning
We uniformly sample regions in the map to evaluate their
utility, which is defined as the cost-benefit of traveling to the
region. The region with the highest utility will be set as the
navigation goal for the subsequent planning problem. We solve
the planning problem in a hierarchical way by formulating it as
a high-level and low-level planning problem. The goal of the
high-level planner is to provide a guidance path that allows us
to transit to a high utility region in the space without the need
to plan long-range trajectories with computationally expensive
collision checks. We obtain a high-level path using Dijkstra’s
to find the minimum-cost path. Subsequently, the low-level
planner selects a local navigation goal along this path and
generates collision-free and dynamically-feasible trajectory
candidates to the local goal with the method presented in
Sec. III-D. We evaluate the accumulated information along
these trajectories and select the candidate with the highest
information gain.
C. Experiments & Results
We conduct several real-world experiments in both indoor
and outdoor environments and show that our proposed infor-
mation metric facilitates efficient exploration. We compare our
approach against two baseline methods - an ensemble-based
approach that computes the variance across three models, and
FisherRF [26] which evaluates viewpoints based on Fisher
Information. We evaluate map reconstruction quality with

<!-- page 5 -->
5
[B] Hierarchical Mapping
Sensors
& Visual 
Odometry
[C] Planning
Trajectory
Dense
Sparse
Trajectory
Optimization
Discrete
Planning
[A] Front-end
Processing
Gaussian
Splatting
Submaps
Regions
Gaussians
G1 G2
G3 G4
G5
Clusters
Is task complete?
Agglomerative
Clustering
Path
Vision Language
Model
Yes. In this image, there is a 
building with a brick wall and 
glass windows. There are 
two doors ...
Find the 
entrance to 
the building
Compressed Language
Features
Figure 5: An overview of the ATLAS Navigator system. The front-end processing modules [A] extracts and compresses dense pixel-level language features
from the image. The module also clusters features based on geometry and semantics in the map. [B] The hierarchical mapping module fuses RGB and depth
images and the odometric path from the robot into the map. The map is partitioned from bottom-up into the objects, regions and submaps. The local map
comprises the loaded submaps while the rest are unloaded for memory efficiency (shown in gray). [C] The planning module consists of a discrete planner
that operates on the sparse map and generates a reference path, while the continuous planner computes trajectories through the dense Gaussians in the local
map. A VLM is queried for task termination. Figure from [47].
the following metrics: Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio (PSNR),
Structural Similarity Index [52] (SSIM), Learned Perceptual
Image Patch Similarity [53] (LPIPS) on the color images
and Root Mean-Square-Error (RMSE) on the depth images.
Our proposed metric is efficient to compute compared to
other methods and lends itself to real-time operation. The
quantitative results are presented in Tab. II. In Fig. 3, we show
qualitative results of novel-view rendering from the onboard
Gaussian splatting map and the corresponding groundtruth
observations of the experiment areas. We show that our ap-
proach is able to construct maps of higher quality and fidelity
compared to other information metrics built on frontier-based
exploration.
V. LARGE-SCALE SEMANTIC NAVIGATION
Our work in ATLAS Navigator [47] shows that the Gaussian
splatting representation can be used to address the challenge
of task-oriented navigation. In particular, we demonstrate that
we can use Gaussian splatting to incrementally build a rich
semantic map and simultaneously identify regions in the map
with high relevance for task-driven navigation. An overview
of the system is illustrated in Fig. 5.
A. Hierarchical Semantic Mapping
To build and act on semantically rich maps that support
diverse tasks in unstructured environments, we require a
representation that integrates dense semantic and geometric
information which can be constructed and used in real-time
for large-scale environments. In [47], we propose an agglom-
erative data structure built on language-embedded Gaussian
splatting that does not rely on explicit semantics or geometric
priors.
Feature embedding. For each observation, we extract CLIP
features from the image. To enable efficient embedding of
language features in the Gaussian map, we use PCA to
compress the features. We obtain representative basis vectors
of CLIP features by running PCA on features extracted from
the COCO [54] 2017 dataset. This is done offline and allows
us to just perform a simple projection to compress the features
at runtime. These compressed features are then embedded in
the map through the differential rendering process. In our
experiments, we approximate 512-dimension CLIP features
with 24 PCA components.
Metric-semantic
clustering.
To
efficiently
query
the
language-embedded Gaussians for task relevance and plan-
ning, we construct a sparse, hierarchical semantic map from
the dense Gaussian map. We perform agglomerative clustering
of the Gaussians by Euclidean distance and cosine similarity
of the compressed features. This approach allows us to cluster
Gaussians without the need for image segmentation as in
[17, 18, 55], which may not provide meaningful priors, both
geometrically and semantically, in unstructured environments.
For a given task, we compute relevancy of the Gaussians
clusters and propagate the utility up the tree, providing a sparse
semantic representation for planning.
B. Planning
We build upon the planning approach in Sec. IV-B but
instead aim to maximize task relevancy while respecting a
given budget. We use the hierarchical structure provided by
the submaps and agglomerative clustering to first find a path
through the high-level graph of submaps, followed by a more
specific path through the object-level graph that visits the
submaps in order.

<!-- page 6 -->
6
Figure 6: Experiment areas for large-scale semantic navigation. The park
experiments were conducted in the highlighted yellow areas. The parking
lots are highlighted in red and blue. Figure from [47].
C. Experiments & Results
We conduct experiments in large-scale, outdoor environ-
ments. The experiment areas are illustrated in Fig. 6. In
each experiment, we specify the task in natural language. In
Outdoor1, we evaluate the framework’s capacity to load a pre-
built map, localize itself and then navigate to a desired target
with the existing graph. In the rest of the experiments, we
showcase the method’s applicability to semantic navigation in
entirely unexplored environments by leveraging utility signals
for task completion. A VLM determines task termination using
a yes/no prompt.
The results are presented in Tab. III. We assess the robot’s
performance by analyzing its trajectory in each trial. The
actual path length (PL) is compared against two benchmark
measurements: the shortest possible path (SP) and the ground
truth path (GT). We calculate SP using the completed planning
graph, which eliminates odometry discrepancies as both the
traversed route and the graph are derived from identical
odometry data. The GT path length is determined using
human-annotated GPS coordinates on Google Earth. For each
experiment, we compute the competitive ratio (labeled ratio in
Tab. III), comparing the robot’s visually-estimated travel dis-
tance to these reference measurements. This ratio is expressed
as SP
P L and GT
P L. To provide context for the experiment scale, we
report the approximate operational area (derived from Google
Earth) and the total number of Gaussians in each map.
VI. LESSONS LEARNED
In this section, we discuss some challenges faced through
our experimentation and opportunities to address them in
future research. Specifically, in our past work we augmented
the capability of Gaussian splatting to hold semantic features
and designed our planner to use the Gaussians as an oracle to
check if a point lies in free space. While this representation
is amenable to planning problems, the close coupling of the
rendering quality to the captured noisy 3D geometry and pose
estimation still proves to be challenging when the planned
paths may result in non-smooth behavior on the robot.
A. Gaussian splatting for UAV autonomy
Implementing a similar framework on a UAV with an
embedded computing device such as an NVIDIA Jetson intro-
duces additional challenges. Work such as [50, 56] consider
aerial autonomy but note the computational challenges and run
the splatting process offboard. A unified memory architecture
may require unloading submaps to disk to maintain large maps.
Additional considerations are required for 3D planning, where
computing 3D motion primitives will result in a larger search
space and significantly more collision checks. Alternatively,
other planning approaches such as those using safe flight
corridors can be adapted to work directly on the Gaussians.
While existing methods for hierarchical Gaussian splatting
focus on rendering at different levels of detail, these techniques
can potentially be leveraged for efficient collision checking at
different resolutions.
B. Dense semantics for scene understanding
While a sparse semantic graph is suited for planning, the
dense semantics in the map can be useful for terrain clas-
sification and traversability estimation. Maintaining a dense
geometric map in unstructured environments can be advanta-
geous since the geometry of small and thin obstacles such as
branches and lampposts can be more accurately represented.
Such an example is shown in Fig. 7. Additionally, having
a dense semantic map opens up opportunities for handling
multiple tasks and provides more context for executing under-
specified tasks.
C. Towards tightly-coupled Gaussian splatting SLAM
In this work, we adopt a parallel tracking and mapping
framework, relying on an external visual-inertial odometry
source to construct the map. In the case of using LiDAR as
an odometry source, we noticed significant errors in the map
due to misalignment between the LiDAR odometry estimates
and the camera images. Such issues are expected when fusing
data from different sensors. In the case of a vision-only system,
we also encountered issues with localization due to drift in the
visual-inertial odometry. While such an approach is common
in voxel-based mapping, a more tightly-coupled localization
and mapping method is required for fine-grained mapping,
especially when photometric quality is of concern such as in
radiance field representations. While existing Gaussian splat-
ting SLAM approaches have difficulty with large viewpoint
changes as is common in real-time operation, they nonetheless
provide a valuable starting point for advancing toward real-
time SLAM systems suitable for autonomous operation.
VII. CONCLUSION
Our work demonstrates that Gaussian splatting is a promis-
ing unified representation for autonomous robot navigation in
challenging unstructured outdoor environments. By addressing
key challenges in large-scale autonomy, the work presented
here opens new possibilities for robots to explore, understand
and navigate complex environments. Further research in the
highlighted areas will bring us closer to operating effectively
in the diverse and challenging settings of the real world.

<!-- page 7 -->
7
Table III: Overview of semantic navigation experiments. PL refers to path length, SP refers to the shortest path computed on the full planning graph
after the experiment is complete, and GT refers to the ground truth. Table from [47].
Experiment
Task
Prior
Distance (m)
Area
Num. of
Map
PL (m)
SP (m / ratio)
GT (m / ratio)
(m2)
Gaussians
Outdoor1
Navigate to entrance to pier
Yes
185.78
–
–
184.86
0.99
3346.50
2,661,562
Outdoor2
Inspect road blockage
No
94.25
45.16
0.48
43.52
0.46
1063.57
1,087,489
Outdoor3
Find parking lot
No
69.19
46.439
0.67
43.22
0.62
1280.10
1,473,420
Outdoor4
Find river near road
No
742.42
473.64
0.64
472.55
0.64
17791.14
7,769,214
Outdoor5
Find boardwalk near road
No
1257.53
688.90
0.55
671.76
0.53
21870.34
11,279,776
Figure 7: Novel-view renderings from a Gaussian splatting map. The geometry
of thin obstacles such as this lamppost can be accurately captured with such
a representation.
REFERENCES
[1] X. Liu, S. W. Chen, G. V. Nardari, C. Qu, F. Cladera, C. J. Taylor, and
V. Kumar, “Challenges and opportunities for autonomous micro-uavs in
precision agriculture,” IEEE Micro, vol. 42, no. 1, pp. 61–68, 2022.
[2] A. Prabhu, X. Liu, I. Spasojevic, Y. Wu, Y. Shao, D. Ong, J. Lei,
P. C. Green, P. Chaudhari, and V. Kumar, “Uavs for forestry: Metric-
semantic mapping and diameter estimation with autonomous aerial
robots,” Mechanical Systems and Signal Processing, vol. 208, p. 111050,
2024.
[3] Y. Tian, K. Liu, K. Ok, L. Tran, D. Allen, N. Roy, and J. P. How,
“Search and rescue under the forest canopy using multiple uavs,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 39, no. 10-11, pp. 1201–
1221, 2020.
[4] A. Bircher, M. S. Kamel, K. Alexis, H. Oleynikova, and R. Siegwart,
“Receding horizon path planning for 3d exploration and surface inspec-
tion,” Autonomous Robots, vol. 42, 02 2018.
[5] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, C. Stachniss, and W. Burgard,
“Octomap: An efficient probabilistic 3d mapping framework based on
octrees,” Autonomous robots, vol. 34, pp. 189–206, 2013.
[6] L. Han, F. Gao, B. Zhou, and S. Shen, “Fiesta: Fast incremental
euclidean distance fields for online motion planning of aerial robots,”
in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), 2019, pp. 4423–4430.
[7] H. Oleynikova, Z. Taylor, M. Fehr, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “Voxblox:
Incremental 3d euclidean signed distance fields for on-board mav
planning,” in 2017 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2017, pp. 1366–1373.
[8] A. Asgharivaskasi and N. Atanasov, “Semantic octree mapping and
shannon mutual information computation for robot exploration,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1910–1928, 2023.
[9] T. Dang, C. Papachristos, and K. Alexis, “Autonomous exploration and
simultaneous object search using aerial robots,” in 2018 IEEE Aerospace
Conference.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1–7.
[10] X. Liu, J. Lei, A. Prabhu, Y. Tao, I. Spasojevic, P. Chaudhari,
N. Atanasov, and V. Kumar, “Slideslam: Sparse, lightweight, decentral-
ized metric-semantic slam for multi-robot navigation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.17249, 2024.
[11] I. Armeni, Z.-Y. He, J. Gwak, A. R. Zamir, M. Fischer, J. Malik, and
S. Savarese, “3d scene graph: A structure for unified semantics, 3d space,
and camera,” in IEEE/CVF Int. Conf. on Computer Vision, 2019, pp.
5664–5673.
[12] S.-C. Wu, J. Wald, K. Tateno, N. Navab, and F. Tombari, “Scenegraph-
fusion: Incremental 3d scene graph prediction from rgb-d sequences,”
in Proc. of IEEE Conf. on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 7515–7525.
[13] S. Looper, J. Rodriguez-Puigvert, R. Siegwart, C. Cadena, and
L. Schmid, “3d vsg: Long-term semantic scene change prediction
through 3d variable scene graphs,” in IEEE Int. Conf. on Robotics &
Automation.
IEEE, 2023, pp. 8179–8186.
[14] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, S. Hu, R. Talak, R. Abdulhai, J. Strader,
and L. Carlone, “Foundations of spatial perception for robotics:
Hierarchical representations and real-time systems,” The International
Journal
of
Robotics
Research,
2024.
[Online].
Available:
https:
//doi.org/10.1177/02783649241229725
[15] D. Maggio, Y. Chang, N. Hughes, M. Trang, D. Griffith, C. Dougherty,
E. Cristofalo, L. Schmid, and L. Carlone, “Clio: Real-time task-driven
open-set 3d scene graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.13696, 2024.
[16] V. N. Devarakonda, R. G. Goswami, A. U. Kaypak, N. Patel, R. Khor-
rambakht, P. Krishnamurthy, and F. Khorrami, “Orionnav: Online plan-
ning for robot autonomy with context-aware llm and open-vocabulary
semantic scene graphs,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.06239, 2024.
[17] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, K. Jatavallabhula, B. Sen, A. Agar-
wal, C. Rivera, W. Paul, K. Ellis, R. Chellappa, C. Gan, C. de Melo,
J. Tenenbaum, A. Torralba, F. Shkurti, and L. Paull, “Conceptgraphs:
Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for perception and planning,” Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation, 2024.
[18] A. Werby, C. Huang, M. B¨uchner, A. Valada, and W. Burgard, “Hi-
erarchical Open-Vocabulary 3D Scene Graphs for Language-Grounded
Robot Navigation,” in Proceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems,
Delft, Netherlands, July 2024.
[19] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106,
2021.
[20] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Transactions on
Graphics, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2023.
[21] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, “Splatam: Splat, track & map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
[22] Z. Peng, T. Shao, Y. Liu, J. Zhou, Y. Yang, J. Wang, and K. Zhou, “Rtg-
slam: Real-time 3d reconstruction at scale using gaussian splatting,” in
ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, 2024, pp. 1–11.
[23] J. Hu, X. Chen, B. Feng, G. Li, L. Yang, H. Bao, G. Zhang, and
Z. Cui, “Cg-slam: Efficient dense rgb-d slam in a consistent uncertainty-
aware 3d gaussian field,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2025, pp. 93–112.
[24] J. Yu, T. Chen, and M. Schwager, “Hammer: Heterogeneous, multi-robot
semantic gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.14147, 2025.
[25] W. Jiang, B. Lei, K. Ashton, and K. Daniilidis, “Multimodal llm guided
exploration and active mapping using fisher information,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.17422, 2024.
[26] W. Jiang, B. Lei, and K. Daniilidis, “Fisherrf: Active view selection and
uncertainty quantification for radiance fields using fisher information,”
arXiv, 2023.
[27] M. Qin, W. Li, J. Zhou, H. Wang, and H. Pfister, “Langsplat: 3d language
gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 20 051–20 060.
[28] A. Radford, J. W. Kim, C. Hallacy, A. Ramesh, G. Goh, S. Agarwal,
G. Sastry, A. Askell, P. Mishkin, J. Clark, et al., “Learning transferable
visual models from natural language supervision,” in International
conference on machine learning.
PMLR, 2021, pp. 8748–8763.
[29] L. Zhu, Y. Li, E. Sandstr¨om, S. Huang, K. Schindler, and I. Armeni,
“Loopsplat: Loop closure by registering 3d gaussian splats,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.10154, 2024.
[30] V. Yugay, Y. Li, T. Gevers, and M. R. Oswald, “Gaussian-slam:
Photo-realistic dense slam with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2312.10070, 2023.
[31] B. Yamauchi, “A frontier-based approach for autonomous exploration,”
in Proceedings 1997 IEEE International Symposium on Computational
Intelligence in Robotics and Automation CIRA’97.’Towards New Com-
putational Principles for Robotics and Automation’.
IEEE, 1997, pp.
146–151.

<!-- page 8 -->
8
[32] S. Shen, N. Michael, and V. Kumar, “Autonomous indoor 3d exploration
with a micro-aerial vehicle,” in 2012 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation.
IEEE, 2012, pp. 9–15.
[33] B. Zhou, Y. Zhang, X. Chen, and S. Shen, “Fuel: Fast uav exploration
using incremental frontier structure and hierarchical planning,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 6, no. 2, pp. 779–786, 2021.
[34] Y. Tao, Y. Wu, B. Li, F. Cladera, A. Zhou, D. Thakur, and V. Kumar,
“SEER: Safe efficient exploration for aerial robots using learning to
predict information gain,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1235–1241.
[35] K. Saulnier, N. Atanasov, G. J. Pappas, and V. Kumar, “Information
theoretic active exploration in signed distance fields,” in 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2020, pp. 4080–4085.
[36] L. Schmid, M. Pantic, R. Khanna, L. Ott, R. Siegwart, and J. Nieto, “An
efficient sampling-based method for online informative path planning in
unknown environments,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5,
no. 2, pp. 1500–1507, 2020.
[37] B. Charrow, S. Liu, V. Kumar, and N. Michael, “Information-theoretic
mapping using cauchy-schwarz quadratic mutual information,” in 2015
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2015, pp. 4791–4798.
[38] A. Bircher, M. Kamel, K. Alexis, H. Oleynikova, and R. Siegwart,
“Receding horizon” next-best-view” planner for 3d exploration,” in
2016 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2016, pp. 1462–1468.
[39] S. He, Y. Tao, I. Spasojevic, V. Kumar, and P. Chaudhari, “An ac-
tive perception game for robust information gathering,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.00769, 2024.
[40] S. He, C. D. Hsu, D. Ong, Y. S. Shao, and P. Chaudhari, “Active per-
ception using neural radiance fields,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.09892,
2023.
[41] R. Jin, Y. Gao, Y. Wang, H. Lu, and F. Gao, “Gs-planner: A
gaussian-splatting-based planning framework for active high-fidelity
reconstruction,” 2024. [Online]. Available: https://arxiv.org/abs/2405.
10142
[42] Z. Xu, R. Jin, K. Wu, Y. Zhao, Z. Zhang, J. Zhao, F. Gao, Z. Gan,
and W. Ding, “Hgs-planner: Hierarchical planning framework for ac-
tive scene reconstruction using 3d gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2409.17624, 2024.
[43] Z. Dai, A. Asgharivaskasi, T. Duong, S. Lin, M.-E. Tzes, G. Pappas,
and N. Atanasov, “Optimal scene graph planning with large language
model guidance,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 14 062–14 069.
[44] Z. Ravichandran, L. Peng, N. Hughes, J. D. Griffith, and L. Carlone,
“Hierarchical representations and explicit memory: Learning effective
navigation policies on 3d scene graphs using graph neural networks,”
in 2022 International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2022, pp. 9272–9279.
[45] N. Yokoyama, S. Ha, D. Batra, J. Wang, and B. Bucher, “Vlfm: Vision-
language frontier maps for zero-shot semantic navigation,” in 2024 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2024, pp. 42–48.
[46] Z. Ravichandran, V. Murali, M. Tzes, G. J. Pappas, and V. Kumar,
“Spine: Online semantic planning for missions with incomplete natural
language specifications in unstructured environments,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.03035, 2024.
[47] D. Ong, Y. Tao, V. Murali, I. Spasojevic, V. Kumar, and P. Chaudhari,
“Atlas navigator: Active task-driven language-embedded gaussian splat-
ting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.20386, 2025.
[48] Y. Tao, D. Ong, V. Murali, I. Spasojevic, P. Chaudhari, and V. Kumar,
“Rt-guide: Real-time gaussian splatting for information-driven explo-
ration,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.18122, 2024.
[49] N. Steinke, D. Goehring, and R. Rojas, “Groundgrid: Lidar point
cloud ground segmentation and terrain estimation,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 1, pp. 420–426, 2024.
[50] T. Chen, O. Shorinwa, J. Bruno, A. Swann, J. Yu, W. Zeng, K. Nagami,
P. Dames, and M. Schwager, “Splat-nav: Safe real-time robot navigation
in gaussian splatting maps,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 2025.
[51] S. Liu, K. Mohta, N. Atanasov, and V. Kumar, “Search-based motion
planning for aggressive flight in SE(3),” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 3, no. 3, pp. 2439–2446, 2018.
[52] Z. Wang, E. Simoncelli, and A. Bovik, “Multiscale structural similarity
for image quality assessment,” in The Thrity-Seventh Asilomar Confer-
ence on Signals, Systems & Computers, 2003, vol. 2, 2003, pp. 1398–
1402 Vol.2.
[53] R. Zhang, P. Isola, A. A. Efros, E. Shechtman, and O. Wang, “The
unreasonable effectiveness of deep features as a perceptual metric,” in
CVPR, 2018.
[54] T.-Y. Lin, M. Maire, S. Belongie, J. Hays, P. Perona, D. Ramanan,
P. Doll´ar, and C. L. Zitnick, “Microsoft coco: Common objects in
context,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2014: 13th European Conference,
Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12, 2014, Proceedings, Part V 13.
Springer, 2014, pp. 740–755.
[55] K. M. Jatavallabhula, A. Kuwajerwala, Q. Gu, M. Omama, T. Chen,
A.
Maalouf,
S.
Li,
G.
Iyer,
S.
Saryazdi,
N.
Keetha,
et
al.,
“Conceptfusion: Open-set multimodal 3d mapping,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2302.07241, 2023.
[56] L. Jin, X. Zhong, Y. Pan, J. Behley, C. Stachniss, and M. Popovi´c,
“Activegs: Active scene reconstruction using gaussian splatting,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
