<!-- page 1 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
1
MCN-SLAM: Multi-Agent Collaborative Neural SLAM with Hybrid
Implicit Neural Scene Representation
Tianchen Deng, Guole Shen, Xun Chen, Shenghai Yuan, Hongming Shen, Guohao Peng, Zhenyu Wu, Jingchuan
Wang, Lihua Xie, Fellow, IEEE, Danwei Wang, Fellow, IEEE, Hesheng Wang, Weidong Chen
Fig. 1: We visualize the outdoor scenes of our DES dataset (≈276,000 m2). The 3D map collected by more than 200 industrial
laser scanners. We show the scene reconstruction results of some localized regions in different colors.
Abstract—Neural implicit scene representations have recently
shown promising results in dense visual SLAM. However, exist-
ing implicit SLAM algorithms are constrained to single-agent
scenarios, and fall difficulty in large-scale scenes and long
sequences. Existing NeRF-based multi-agent SLAM frameworks
cannot meet the constraints of communication bandwidth. To this
end, we propose the first distributed multi-agent collaborative
neural SLAM framework with hybrid scene representation, dis-
tributed camera tracking, intra-to-inter loop closure, and online
distillation for multiple submap fusion. A novel triplane-grid
Tianchen Deng, Guole Shen, Hesheng Wang, Jingchuan Wang, Weidong
Chen are with Institute of Medical Robotics and Department of Automation,
Shanghai Jiao Tong University, and Key Laboratory of System Control and
Information Processing, Ministry of Education, Shang hai 200240, China. Xun
Chen, Shenghai Yuan, Hongming Shen, Guohao Peng, Zhenyu Wu, Lihua
Xie, Danwei Wang is with School of Electrical and Electronic Engineering,
Nanyang Technological University, Singapore. This research is supported by
the National Research Foundation, Singapore, under the NRF Medium Sized
Centre scheme (CARTIN), ASTAR under National Robotics Programme with
Grant No.M22NBK0109, and by the National Research Foundation, Singapore
and Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore under its Maritime Transfor-
mation Programme (Project No. SMI-2022-MTP-04). This work is supported
by the National Key R&D Program of China (Grant 2020YFC2007500),
the National Natural Science Foundation of China (Grant U1813206), and
the Science and Technology Commission of Shanghai Municipality (Grant
20DZ2220400). This research is supported by the National Research Foun-
dation, Singapore, under the NRF Medium Sized Centre scheme (CARTIN),
Maritime and Port Authority of Singapore under its Maritime Transforma-
tion Programme (Project No. SMI-2022-MTP-04), ASTAR under National
Robotics Programme with Grant No.M22NBK0109.
joint scene representation method is proposed to improve scene
reconstruction. Moreover, for large-scale and unbounded outdoor
scene, we propose a novel normalization method for implicit
scene representation, which enhances the network’s capability for
extensive unbounded environments. A novel intra-to-inter loop
closure method is designed to achieve local (single-agent) and
global (multi-agent) consistency. We also design a novel online
distillation method to fuse the information of different submaps
to achieve global consistency. Furthermore, to the best of our
knowledge, there is no real-world dataset for NeRF-based/GS-
based SLAM that provides both continuous-time trajectories
groundtruth and high-accuracy 3D meshes groundtruth. To
this end, we propose the first real-world Dense slam (DES)
dataset covering both single-agent and multi-agent scenarios,
ranging from small room to large-scale outdoor scenes, with high-
accuracy ground truth for both 3D mesh and continuous-time
camera trajectory. This dataset can advance the development of
the research in both SLAM, 3D reconstruction, and visual foun-
dation model. Experiments on various datasets demonstrate the
superiority of the proposed method in both mapping, tracking,
and communication. The dataset and code will open-source on
https://github.com/dtc111111/mcnslam.
I. INTRODUCTION
Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping has been a
fundamental challenge in robotics and computer vision, which
aims to achieve 3D reconstruction of unknown environments
arXiv:2506.18678v2  [cs.CV]  19 Aug 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
2
and localization. Visual SLAM has wide applications such as
Spatial AI [1], autonomous driving [2], and remote sensing [3].
Traditional visual SLAM has witnessed continuous develop-
ment, achieving accurate mapping and tracking in various
scenarios, such as
[4]–[6]. They use sparse point cloud as
the scene representation which use handcraft descriptors for
image matching and represent scenes using sparse feature
point maps. Due to the sparse nature of such point cloud,
it is difficult for humans to understand how machines interact
with the scene, and these methods cannot meet the demands
of collision avoidance and motion planning. Attention then
turns to dense scene reconstruction. DTAM [7] is the first
dense visual SLAM system, which estimates detailed tex-
tured depth maps at selected keyframes to produce a surface
patchwork with millions of vertices. [8]–[10] are the subse-
quent improvement works focusing on scene reconstruction
accuracy. They reconstruct meaningful 3D global maps with
dense scene representation. However, their performance is
limited by high memory consumption, slow processing speeds,
and low accuracy in real-time operation. Nowadays, with
the proposal of Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [11], many
following works combine implicit scene representation with
SLAM framework. iMAP [12] is the first work to use a single
multi-layer perceptron (MLP) to reconstruct the scene in an
online mapping framework. [13]–[16] further improve scene
representation. However, most existing NeRF-based SLAM
methods focus on single agent settings. In contrast, multi-
robot collaborative simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) represents a crucial area of robotics research, owing
to its ability to enable situational awareness across large-
scale environments over extended durations. This capability
is foundational for a wide range of applications, includ-
ing factory automation, search and rescue operations, intel-
ligent transportation systems, planetary exploration, as well
as surveillance and monitoring in both military and civilian
contexts. Traditional multi-agent SLAM systems [17], [18]
also use sparse point cloud as the scene representation. Some
methods employs dense semantic segmentation networks [19],
[20] for multi-agent semantic mapping and pose estimation.
Kimera-multi [21] propose a complete distributed multi-robot
system for semantic dense visual SLAM, which is capable
of operating under realistic communication constraints. CP-
SLAM [22] is the first multi-agent SLAM neural system
with implicit scene representation using a centralized learning
framework for scene reconstruction. By integrating NeRF, this
approach significantly enhances dense scene reconstruction.
However, it operates as a centralized system, requiring all
keyframe images to be transmitted to a central server to
train an additional global network, which cannot meet the
communication bandwidth restriction. Given the constraints
of privacy and communication bandwidth, we design the first
distributed multi-agent neural SLAM framework, which only
relies on local (peer-to-peer) communication with only neural
network parameters, keyframe descriptors instead of raw data
when the system detects a loop. Compared to point cloud map
representations, our neural scene representation method does
not grow indefinitely as the map size increases, making it more
efficient for multi-agent communication and data transmission.
Our method achieves accurate scene reconstruction, robust
pose estimation, and efficient multi-agent communication. The
system can continue to operate even if communication is lost
with a particular agent.
In local scene representation, we propose a hybrid scene
representation method with planar-grid-coordinate encoding
network architecture for fast convergence, high accuracy, and
completion of unseen region. We utilize low-resolution tri-
plane feature to capture the scene’s low-frequency components
(e.g. shape), which facilitates fast convergence. Meanwhile,
high-resolution hash grid are employed to represent high-
frequency details (e.g. texture), enabling high-fidelity recon-
struction. We use one-blob encoding (coordinate encoding)
with Multilayer Perceptron (MLP) to represent the coher-
ence priors inherent for hole filling. The novel hybrid scene
representation method brings together the benefits of fast
convergence, high accuracy, and hole filling in areas without
observation. Specifically, for real-world outdoor unbounded
scenes, we design a normalized representation method to
improve the network capability.
Furthermore, we propose a novel intra-to-inter loop closure
method with online distillation for the multi-agent neural
SLAM framework to mitigate the accumulation of pose errors
and achieve consensus scene reconstruction among multiple
agents. Intra-loop closure is designed to detect previously
visited locations by a single robot, effectively eliminating
cumulative errors using the current robot’s keyframe database.
In a distributed neural SLAM system, all these agents opti-
mize their scene representation independently with local and
different observations. As a result, the final maps generated
by individual agents only represent specific portions of the
scene, leading to discrepancies. So, we propose a novel inter-
loop closure to detect the same scenario visited by multiple
agents, register submaps generated from different agents, and
fuse the different implicit submaps. A global consistency loss
is introduced to optimize and register the pose of different
submaps. A peer-to-peer online distillation method is designed
for the fusion of different neural implicit submaps. When com-
munication is available, we perform intra-to-inter loop closure,
exchange the neural network parameters of each agent, and
perform implicit submap fusion to achieve global consistency
across multiple agents. The results demonstrate that each agent
ultimately acquires accurate global information, enabling the
construction of a consistent global map.
Furthermore, to the best of our knowledge, we find that
current datasets are either virtual, such as Replica [23] or
only provide trajectory ground truth without 3D ground truth,
such as ScanNet [24], and TUM dataset [25]. ScanNet++ [26]
is a recently proposed dataset that offers 3D ground truth.
However, its poses are obtained through COLMAP, making
them unsuitable as accurate SLAM ground truth. In addi-
tion, Scannet++ is primarily intended as a NeRF Training
& Novel View Synthesis dataset, as stated in their paper
and SplaTAM [27]. ScanNet++ contains non-time-continuous
trajectories with numerous abrupt jumps and teleportations,
which makes it unsuitable for SLAM systems. To this end, we
propose a real-world dataset ranging from small-room scenar-
ios to large-scale campus. Our dataset provides high-accuracy

<!-- page 3 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
3
Fig. 2: We present MCN-SLAM, the first distributed multi-agent collaborative SLAM system with distributed mapping and
camera tracking, hybrid implicit scene representation, intra-to-inter loop closure, and multiple submap fusion. Depicted at the
middle, we present the scene reconstruction results of four agents, demonstrating scene reconstruction performance in the
real-world, large-scale long-corridor scenes (≈1200 m2). This scene is collected through various industrial laser scanners. We
present the rendered depth and color image of different type of agents around the corridor. The trajectory of each agent is
marked in a unique color for clarity.
and time-continuous trajectory and 3D mesh groundtruth,
which is suitable for all neural SLAM and traditional SLAM
systems, such as NeRF/3DGS-based SLAM systems and 3D
reconstruction methods such as DUSt3R [28] and VGGT [29].
Overall, our contributions are shown as follows:
• We design the first distributed multi-agent neural SLAM
framework, MCN-SLAM, with hybrid neural scene repre-
sentation, distributed mapping and tracking, intra-to-inter
loop closure, achieving accurate collaborative scene re-
construction, robust camera tracking, and efficient multi-
agent communication.
• A novel hybrid representation method with planar-grid-
coordinate network is designed for fast convergence, ac-
curate and efficient neural scene representation, substan-
tially reducing memory growth from cubic to quadratic.
We also design a novel normalized representation to im-
prove scene capability for large-scale unbounded outdoor
scenes.
• We propose a novel intra-to-inter loop closure method
with an online distillation method to eliminate the cumu-
lative pose drift and register multiple submaps. The online
distillation method is proposed to fuse the information
from different neural submaps to achieve global map
consistency.
• We propose the first real-world large-scale neural dense
SLAM dataset (DES) for all kinds of SLAM systems with
high-accuracy ground-truth for both camera trajectory
and 3D reconstruction mesh, which can significantly
foster the development of the community.
II. RELATED WORK
Sparse Visual SLAM In recent years, sparse visual SLAM
has enhanced real-time performance by focusing on extracting
and mapping key environmental features. PTAM [30] is a
keyframe-based approach, is notable for separating feature
tracking and map construction into two parallel tasks. ORB-
SLAM [4] is a milestone in sparse visual SLAM with its
comprehensive design and multi-threaded architecture. Build-
ing upon the robust base of ORB-SLAM, ORB-SLAM2 [31]
expands capabilities to stereo and RGB-D cameras, enhancing
accuracy and robustness across diverse environments. Further
advancements include semi-direct approaches like SVO [32],
which combine direct tracking with feature-based mapping.
VINS-Mono [5] leverages both monocular visual data and
IMU inputs through tightly-coupled non-linear optimization,
and Fast-LIVO2 [33] leverages lidar, camera and IMU inputs
for pose estimation. [34]–[36] propose a novel feature selec-
tion method for visual SLAM system in dynamic scenes. How-
ever, the inherent limitation of sparse methods is their inability
to provide detailed and continuous environmental representa-
tion. Sparse SLAM captures only key points, resulting in maps

<!-- page 4 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
4
Fig. 3: System Overview. Our system is a multi-agent collaborative SLAM system which consists hybrid scene representation,
distributed tracking, intra-to-inter loop closure, and submap-fusion. In distributed optimization module, each agent takes the
color images and depth images as input. In addition, each agent will exchange the network weights of its peers. We carefully
design consistency loss with color, depth, and SDF loss in inter-loop closure. Each agent can successively performs individual
scene mapping and collaborative mapping and tracking to generate the final neural implicit map with submap-fusion.
that lack comprehensive surface details, which is insufficient
for tasks requiring detailed environmental interaction.
Dense Visual SLAM Dense visual SLAM technologies have
significantly advanced in the past two decades. DTAM [7]
first introduces a dense SLAM system that leverages photo-
metric consistency for tracking handheld cameras and depict-
ing scenes as cost volumes. KinectFusion [10] employs the
iterative-closest-point method for camera tracking and updates
the scene using TSDF-Fusion. DROID-SLAM [37] lever-
ages neural networks to extract richer contextual information
from images, significantly enhancing trajectory estimation.
Kimera [38] propose a 3D dynamic scene graph (DSG), that
seamlessly captures metric and semantic aspects of a dynamic
environment and estimate an accurate 3D metric–semantic
mesh model in real-time. DPVO [39] introduces a novel recur-
rent update operator for patch based correspondence coupled
with differentiable bundle adjustment, outperforming all prior
work. However, these methods remain reliant on traditional
SLAM scene representation (point clouds), which inherently
limits their capabilities in complex scene reconstruction and
require substantial memory.
Implicit Neural SLAM Recent advancements in neural im-
plicit networks have revolutionized 3D scene reconstruction
and camera pose estimation. Many efforts have focused on
combining NeRF with SLAM systems to enhance both accu-
racy and efficiency in dynamic environments. iMAP introduces
a real-time update framework that leverages a single MLP
decoder for scene reconstruction. NICE-SLAM [13] extends
this by incorporating a learnable hierarchical feature grid,
which improves the level of detail and allows for larger scene
representations. ESLAM [14] further optimizes memory usage
by using axis-aligned feature planes, while Co-SLAM [15]
adopts a joint coordinate-parametric encoding strategy to en-
sure complete and accurate surface reconstruction, including
unobserved areas. To adapt to larger environments, [16], [40],
[41] enhances scalability with its progressive scene representa-
tion method. Point-SLAM [42] and Pin-SLAM [43] uses dense
neural points and corresponding MLP to represent the scene.
GO-SLAM [44], Loopy-SLAM [45] use loop closure method
to enhance camera tracking performance. NeSLAM [46] uses
depth uncertainty and design a depth completion and denoising
network for sparse depth images input. DDN-SLAM [47] use
neural implicit representation and dynamic masks for dynamic
scenes. SNI-SLAM [48] use semantic feature with neural
scene representation to improve the scene reconstruction per-
formance. Some 3DGS-based methods, such as [27], [49]–[53]
use 3D Gaussian scene representation method for accurate and
fast reconstruction. Our method builds on these approaches by
expanding from single-agent to multi-agent systems, achieving
a globally coherent 3D reconstruction in large-scale scenarios.
Collaborative Visual SLAM The goal of collaborative visual
SLAM is to estimate the relative poses between multiple robots
while creating a consistent global map. This process typically
employs two primary architectures: centralized and distributed.
The centralized architecture relies on a central server, where
all agents communicate their observations and receive updates,
enabling efficient data integration and global consistency. CVI-
SLAM [54] is the first to introduce full visual-inertial collab-
orative SLAM with two-way communication. CoSLAM [55]
studies the problem of vision-based simultaneous localization
and mapping (SLAM) in dynamic environments. All cameras
work together to build a global map, including 3D positions of
static background points and trajectories of moving foreground
points. CCM-SLAM [56] proposes a centralized collaborative
SLAM framework for robotic agents, each equipped with
a monocular camera, a communication unit, and a small
processing board. It optimizes server by offloading heavy
computations while maintaining agent autonomy with onboard
visual odometry. Some studies focus on decentralized collab-
orative SLAM, where agents exchange information directly
with each other and perform all data fusion onboard, without
relying on a central instance to coordinate the system. Kimera-
Multi [21] is a multi-robot Visual-Inertial Odometry (VIO)
system that enhances tracking accuracy using IMU data, distin-

<!-- page 5 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
5
guishing it from typical Visual Odometry (VO) systems. Door-
SLAM [57] implements a distributed Pose-Graph Optimization
(PGO) scheme. Some works integrate implicit neural represen-
tations into multi-agent SLAM systems. Swarm-SLAM [58]
and D2SLAM [59] are scalable, flexible, decentralized, and
sparse SLAM systems, which are all key properties in swarm
robotics. Some methods [22], [60], [61] introduce a multi-
agent collaborative implicit mapping and tracking algorithm
to construct maps. However, these approaches suffer from
limitations such as inefficient inter-robot communication, lack
of global map consistency, or poor adaptability to both indoor
and outdoor environments. Our proposed multi-agent neural
SLAM framework is the first distributed method, achieving
high-accuracy and consistent scene reconstruction, efficient
robot communication, and robust adaptability across both
indoor and outdoor scenarios.
III. METHODS
The pipeline of our system is shown in Fig. 3. We propose
MCN-SLAM, a collaborate multi-agent SLAM system. The
input of this multi-agent system is RGB-D frames {Ii, Di}M
i=1
with known camera intrinsic K ∈R3×3. Our model predicts
multi-agents camera poses {Ri|ti}M
i=1, color c, and implicit
truncated signed distance function (TSDF) representation. The
system consists of four main modules: (i) local (single-robot)
mapping (Sec. III-A), (ii) distributed camera tracking via PGO
(Sec. III-B), (iii) intra-to-inter loop closure (Sec. III-C) (iv)
sub-map fusion (Sec. III-D). Among these modules, inter-
loop closure and submap fusion are the ones that involve
communication between different robots. We elaborate on the
entire pipeline of our system in the following subsections.
A. Hybrid Scene Representation
Voxel grid-based architectures [13] are the mainstream in
NeRF-based SLAM system. However, they face challenges
with cubic memory growth and real-time performance in
large-scale environments. To enhance the scene representation
capability, we design a novel hybrid scene representation
method with planar-grid-coordinate encoding network. The
planar encoding network employs tri-plane feature encoding
for fast convergence, the grid encoding network employs hash-
grid encoding network for high-fidelity reconstruction, while
the coordinate encoding uses one-blob encoding with the MLP
for smoothness and hole-filling capabilities. Specifically, we
design a dual-scale planar-grid encoding network, consisting
of both coarse and fine levels to model the scene. We use
low-resolution tri-planes network to capture the low-frequency
components of the scene. The network can be formulated as:
T g(x) = T c
g−xy(x) + T c
g−xz(x) + T c
g−yz(x)
(1)
where
T g(x)
denotes
the
tri-plane
geometry
features.
x
is
the
world
coordinate
of
sampling
points.
{T c
g−xy(·), T c
g−xz(·), T c
g−yz(·)} represent the three coarse
feature planes. Similarly, the color tri-plane T c(x) is defined
as:
T c(x) = T c
c−xy(x) + T c
c−xz(x) + T c
c−yz(x)
(2)
where T c
c (x), T f
c (x) denote the coarse feature from color
tri-planes. {T c
c−xy(·), T c
c−xz(·), T c
c−yz(·)} represent the three
coarse color feature planes.
Then we use high-resolution voxel grid to model the high-
frequency components of the scene. V g(x), V c(x) represents
the geometry and color grid feature. For a sample point x,
we use bi-linear interpolating the nearest neighbors on feature
plane and tri-linearly interpolating on hashgrid. Then, we
concatenate the interpolated tri-plane feature and hashgrid
feature as the scene encoding feature. Unlike [13], [14],
which decode the features directly, our approach leverages a
coordinate-based scene representation to model the inherent
coherence priors required for effective hole filling. We use a
geometry decoder to predict SDF value ϕg(x) and a latent
feature vector z:
fg (γ(x), Tg(x), V g(x)) 7→(z, ϕg(x))
(3)
where γ(x) represents coordinate position encoding. We use
one-blob encoding [15] instead of embedding spatial coordi-
nates into multiple frequency bands. Finally, we use a color
decoder to predict the RGB value:
fc (γ(x), z, Tc(x), Tg(x), V c(x), V g(x)) 7→ϕa(x)
(4)
ϕa(x) represents the color of the sample points. Combin-
ing the MLP with the planar-grid scene representation, our
carefully designed network architecture achieves accurate and
smooth surface reconstruction, efficient memory use, and hole
filling performance.
Normalized Triplane Scene Representation Different from
the reconstruction of small indoor objects, large-scale and
unbounded scenes impose higher demands on feature rep-
resentation and resolution. The original feature grid method
is unscalable for large-scale scenarios due to its cubically
growing complexity. Furthermore, for scenes spanning hun-
dreds of meters, the resolution of triplane features remains
inadequate. To address this, we propose a normalized triplane
representation. Specifically, we normalize the triplane network
of each local scene representation to the range [-1,1]. For each
submap in the local map sequence, we compute the norm of
bound and define a bounded scale value, ensuring a stable and
scalable representation for large-scale environments.
Differentiable Rendering We use a differentiable rendering
process to integrate the predicted density and colors from our
local scene representation. We determine a ray r(t) = o + td
whose origin is at the camera center of projection o, ray
direction r. We uniformly sample K points. The sample
bound is within the near and far planes tk ∈[tn, tf], k ∈
{1, . . . , K} with depth values {d1, . . . , dK} and predicted
colors {c1, ..., cK}. For rays with valid depth measurements
d, we additionally sample Ksurface near-surface points uni-
formly in the interval [d −δd, d + δd], where δd is a small
offset around the measured depth. For all sample points along
rays, we query TSDF ϕg(xk) and raw color ϕa(xk) from
our networks and use the SDF-Based rendering approach to
convert SDF values to volume densities:
σ (xk) = 1
β · Sigmoid
−ϕg (xk)
β

(5)

<!-- page 6 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
6
Fig. 4: (a) presents the reconstruction of multi-agent pose graph with intra-to-inter loop closure. (b) and (c) present the
covisibility matirx of intra loop closure and inter loop closure. In Figure (b), the horizontal and vertical axes represent the
keyframes of the local (single-agent) system, while the horizontal and vertical axes in figure (c) represent the keyframes of
the local and peer agents.
where β ∈R is a learnable parameter that controls the sharp-
ness of the surface boundary. Then we define the termination
probability wk, depth ˆd, and color ˆc as:
wk = exp
 
−
n−1
X
m=1
σ (xm)
!
(1 −exp (−σ (xk)))
ˆc =
N
X
k=1
wkϕa (xk)
and
ˆd =
N
X
k=1
wktk
(6)
We employ differentiable rendering to model the color, depth,
and SDF of the scene, enabling high-accuracy online recon-
struction.
B. Distributed Camera Tracking
In multi-agent collaboration SLAM system, distributed pose
estimation are crucial under communication bandwidth restric-
tion and accumulation of pose errors. In this work, we propose
a distributed camera tracking framework involves two stages.
In the first stage, we employ RAFT-based [62] visual features
to estimate the initial trajectory within the local frame of each
robot. Additionally, we design an intra-loop closure method
based on RAFT features to mitigate pose drifts and enhance
global consistency. In the second stage, we introduce an inter-
loop closure strategy with a consistency loss. We first align
the pairwise coordinate frames from different robots α, β,
transforming each robot’s local frame into a shared global
frame. Subsequently, based on each robot’s local odometry,
all frames are aligned to their respective local reference
frames with rendered RGB, depth, and SDF loss. During the
optimization process in this stage, we fix the poses of the
local reference frames and optimize only the remaining frames.
This procedure can be performed in a distributed fashion, with
computation occurring independently within each robot.
In local frame pose estimation of each robot, we take a
live RGB-D video stream as input. Our system first applies a
recurrent update operator based on RAFT [62] to compute the
optical flow of each new frame compared to the last keyframe.
Each input image is processed by a feature extraction network.
The network consists of 6 residual blocks, and 3 downsam-
pling layers, which can produce dense feature map. We use
two networks: feature network to build the set of correlation
volumes, and context network for the update operator.
We define a lookup operator which indexes the correlation
using a grid with radius r, Lr : RH×W ×H×W × RH×W ×2 7→
RH×W ×(r+1)2. The lookup operator takes an H × W grid of
coordinates as input and values from correlation volume using
bilinear interpolation. The lookup operator is applied to each
correlation volume in the pyramid and the final feature vector
is computed by concatenating the results as each level. The
update operator for optical flow is a 3 × 3 convolutional GRU
with hidden state h. The operator updates the current depth
and pose estimates through retraction on the SE3 manifold and
vector addition:
{R|t}(k+1) = Exp

∆ξ(k)
◦{R|t}(k),
(7)
d(k+1) = ∆d(k) + d(k)
(8)
We use the current estimated of poses and depths to estimate
the flow:
pij = Πc
 {R|t}ij ◦Π−1
c
(pi, di)

(9)
{R|t}ij = {R|t}j ◦{R|t}−1
i
(10)
Here Πc is the camera model mapping a set of 3D points onto
the image, and Π−1
c
is the inverse projection function. If the
average flow is larger than a pre-defined τk, a new keyframe is
created and added to the global keyframe database for further
refinement. We use the set of keyframes {KFi}N
i=1 to create
a keyframe-graph structure (V, E), which represents the co-
visibility between frames. An edge (i, j) ∈E means Ii, Ij
have overlapping fields of view which shared points. After
each pose update, we can recompute the visibility to update
the frame graph. The keyframe graph is built dynamically with
the system operation.

<!-- page 7 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
7
Afterward, we use the differentiable Dense Bundle Adjust-
ment (DBA) layer to solve a non-linear squares optimization
problem to correct the camera pose {Ri|ti}M
i=1.
E ({R|t}, d) =
X
(i,j)∈E
p∗
ij −Πc({R|t}ij ◦Π−1
c
(pi, di))∥2
Σij + α
X  ˆdi −Di

2
(11)
where Πc, Π−1
c
are the projection and back-projection func-
tions, ∥· ∥Σ and Σij = diag wij denotes the Mahalanobis
distance which weights the error terms based on the confidence
weights wij. pi is the 2D pixel position from keyframe KFi.
{R|t}ij is the pose transformation from KFi to KFj. We
use p∗
ij to present the estimated flow. α denotes the weight
of depth residual. This loss function states that we want to
optimize the camera pose and per-pixel depth to maximize the
compatibility with flow p∗
ij predicted by the recurrent update
operator. We use local parameterization to linearize Eq. 11 and
use the Gauss-Newton algorithm solve for updates (∆ξ, ∆d).
This parametrization of the structure leads to an extremely
efficient way of solving the dense BA problem, which can be
formulated as a linear least squares problem by linearizing the
system of equations into the familiar cameras/depths arrow-
like block-sparse Hessian H ∈R(c+p)×(c+p), where c and p
are the dimensionality of the cameras and the points. Then the
system can be solved efficiently using the Schur complement
with the pixelwise damping factor λ added to the depth block:
 B
E
ET
C
  ∆ξ
∆d

=
 v
w

(12)
∆ξ =

B −EC−1ET −1  v −EC−1w

∆d = C−1  w −ET ∆ξ

(13)
where C is diagonal and can be cheaply C−1 = 1/C. The
DBA layer is integrated into the computation graph, allowing
backpropagation to occur through the layer during training.
C. Intra-to-Inter Loop Closure
Most neural implicit SLAM frameworks suffer from accu-
mulation of pose drifts and distortion in the reconstruction.
Their tracking networks are performed via minimizing rgb loss
functions with respect to learnable parameters θ to estimate
the relative pose matrix {Ri|ti} ∈SE(3). With the growing
cumulative error ε of pose estimation, those methods result
in failure in large-scale indoor scenes and long videos. Con-
currently, during multi-agent collaborative mapping in large-
scale environments, the accumulation pose error of multiple
agents results in a rapid degradation of the submaps. To
address these problems, we propose a novel intra-to-inter loop
closure method, which can eliminate pose drift and achieve
global consistency across multiple submaps. We illustrate the
schematic diagram of the intra-to-inter loop closure in Fig. 4.
Intra-Loop Closure For single agent (intra) loop closure, we
build the local keyframe-graph (V, E) with two steps: (i) detect
and select keyframe pairs with high covisibility τcov in the
local most recent keyframes Nlocal (ii) detect loop closure
between local keyframes and historical keyframes outside
the local window. Accordingly, we compute a covisibility
matrix of local keyframes of size Nlocal × NKF for local
loop closure. We also compute a covisibility matrix of local
historical keyframes of size NKF × NKF for global loop
closure in each robot, as shown in Fig. 4 (b). The covisibility
is represented by the mean rigid flow between keyframe pairs
using efficient back-projection. Those keyframe pairs with low
covisibility (mean flow higher than thershold (τcov) are filtered
out. We build edges for these keyframe pairs. We suppress
the possible neighboring edges between {KFk}i+rlocal
k=i−rlocal →
{KFk}j+rlocal
k=i−rlocal, where rlocal denotes a temporal radius. For
local loop closure, the number of edges in the graph is linear
to Nlocal with an upper bound Nlocal × Nlocal. The number
of edges of the global loop closure is linear to NKF with an
upper bound NKF × NKF . We also suppress the redundant
neighboring edges with radius rglobal. By constructing a pose
graph using historical frames, we can leverage all information
of each agent to optimize the pose of the current frame.
Through neighborhood suppression and covisibility filtering,
we limit the number of edges in the keyframe-graph and ensure
the efficiency of optimization of intra-loop closure. Intra-loop
closure effectively integrates local information which greatly
improves the accuracy of initial pose estimation of each agent
in large-scale indoor scenes.
Inter-Loop Closure Following the first stage, robots use
visual feature to obtain optimal trajectory estimates. Then,
in the second stage, we use multi-agent inter-loop closure
to register pose and submaps from different robots using
all odometric measurements and putative loop closures. We
formulate the problem to optimize the pose variables from
different robots:
min
{R|t}αi∈SE(3)
∀α∈R,∀i
X
α∈R
nα−1
X
i=1
L
 {R|t}αi, {R|t}αi+1

|
{z
}
odometry
+
X
(αi,βj)∈L
L

rαi
βi
 {R|t}αi, {R|t}βj

,
|
{z
}
loop closures
(14)
where {R|t}αi denotes the ith pose of robot α in the global
frame. R = {α, β, . . . } denotes the set of robots, nα is the
total number of poses of robot α.
We use keyframe visual descriptors to detect the loop of
different agents. Once the covisibility value of the keyframe
pairs is lower than the thershold τcov, we perform inter loop
closure on these frames. We present the covisibility matrix
in Fig. 4(c). For the robot α, β and the detected frames A,
B, we set the odometric estimates of pose i and pose j as
{R|t}A
αi, {R|t}B
βj ∈SE(3). Then, the relative transformation
between keyframe pairs A, B can be formulate as:
{R|t}A
Bij ≜{R|t}A
αi{R|t}αi
βj

{R|t}B
βj
−1
(15)
where the subscript of {Ri|ti}A
Bij indicates that this estimate
is computed using inter loop closure (i,j). In order to obtain

<!-- page 8 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
8
Fig. 5: The multi-implicit-submap fusion for multi-agent SLAM system. Two submaps M1, M2 with their subvolumes and
keyframes are shown. We demonstrate the fusion process of two submaps, where pose and submap bundle adjustment (BA)
optimization is performed through loop detection and inter loop closure between agents, ultimately registering the submaps
generated by different agents.
a reliable estimate of the true relative transformation, we
formulate the problem:
{R|t}A
Bij ∈
arg min
{R|t}∈SE(3)
X
(i,j)∈Lα,β
L (rij({R|t}))
(16)
where L denotes the loss function. Lα,β is the set of inter-robot
loop closure between robot α and β. We design a consistency
loss to register the pose and submaps from different robots:
Llc({R|t}) = 1
n
n
X
{A,B}
( ˆ
cA −ˆ
cB)2
(17)
Lld({R|t}) = 1
n
n
X
{A,B}

ˆ
dA −ˆ
dB
2
(18)
where ˆ
cA, ˆ
cB are the rendered color image from agent α, β,
while
ˆ
dA, ˆ
dB denote the rendered depth. After that, we fix
the poses of the aligned keyframe pairs and construct a ren-
dering loss that incorporates color, depth, and signed distance
function (SDF) terms. This loss is used to jointly optimize
the poses of the remaining frames within each robot, aligning
them consistently to the global world coordinate frame. Our
designed inter-loop closure effectively aligns the trajectories
and maps across agents.
D. Online Distillation For Submap Fusion
The sensor observations of multiple agents are local and
different, which leads to discrepancies of the final map. In
order to achieve global consistency and consensus on scene
reconstruction among all agents, two critical components are
required: (1) aligning the poses of submaps to ensure global
consistency. In Section III-C, we use intra-to-inter loop closure
to align the poses of different submaps. (2) fusing the implicit
submaps. Unlike traditional point cloud-based maps, implicit
map fusion is particularly challenging, especially in distributed
systems.
Due to communication bandwidth constraints, our peer-
to-peer communication only exchanges network parameters
and keyframe poses. To this end, we propose a novel multi-
agent distillation method to fuse submaps into a global map.
We calculate the overlapping region boundaries of different
agents using the depth input. Then, we use the poses of the
overlapping region keyframe {KF}m
i=1 to render the RGB and
depth keyframe images from different agents. This allows the
networks of two different agents to merge their parameters
solely by comparing the rendered RGB ˆc, depth images ˆd,
and sdf value ˆs with distillation loss Lα−β:
Lα−β = 1
m
m
X
α,β∈{KF }

(ˆcα −ˆcβ)2 +

ˆ
dα −ˆdβ
2
+
( ˆsα −ˆsβ)2 (19)
We use this distillation loss to optimize the network parameters
of agent α and β. We learn the scene parameters to ensure
that the overall map scene representation parameters remain
globally consistent, shown in Fig. 5.
E. Distributed Scene Reconstruction Optimization
Our mapping thread is performed via minimizing our objec-
tive functions with respect to network parameters θ and camera
parameters {R|t}. The color and depth rendering losses are
used in our mapping thread:
Lc = 1
N
N
X
i=1
(ˆci −Ci)2 ,
Ld =
1
|Ri|
X
i∈Ri

ˆdi −Di
2
(20)
where Ri is the set of rays that have a valid depth ob-
servation. In addition, we design SDF loss, free space loss
for our mapping thread. Specifically, for samples within the
truncation region, we leverage the depth sensor measurement
to approximate the signed distance field:
Lsdf =
1
|Ri|
X
r∈Ri
1
|Xtr
r |
X
x∈Xtr
r
(ϕg(x) · T −(Di −d))2
(21)
where Xtr
r
is a set of points on the ray r that lie in the
truncation region, |Di −d| ≤tr. We differentiate the weights
of points that are closer to the surface Xtm
r
= {x|x ∈
|Di −d| ≤0.4tr} from those that are at the tail of the
truncation region Xtt
r in our SDF loss.
Lsdfm = Lsdf
 Xtm
r

,
Lsdft = Lsdf
 Xtt
r

(22)
For sample points that are far from the surface |Di −d| ≥T:
Lfs =
1
|Ri|
X
r∈Ri
1
Xfs
r

X
x∈Xfs
r
(ϕg(x) −1)2
(23)
This loss can force the SDF prediction value to be the
truncated distance tr.

<!-- page 9 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
9
Fig. 6: Visualization of examples from our dense SLAM dataset (DES) in different scenes: (a) Indoor Long corridor, (b)
Semi-Outdoor Corridor, (c) Cross-Floor Building.
F. Multi-agent Communication
In our distributed multi-agent SLAM framework, when
communication becomes available, robot α initiates the dis-

<!-- page 10 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
10
Fig. 7: Visualization of examples from our dense SLAM dataset (DES) in different scenes: (a) Outdoor Carpark, (b) Outdoor
Campus.
tributed loop closure detection process by sending the visual
descriptors of its newly added keyframes to another robot β.
For multi-agent communication, we use NetVLAD [87] visual
features to represent each keyframe. The overall information
flow is illustrated in Fig. 3. Loop closures are detected by
computing the similarity between these visual descriptors.
Throughout all our experiments, we follow the same setting
as Kimera-Multi [21]: robots are constantly in communication
range, ensuring that inter-robot loop closures are triggered
at the earliest possible opportunity. When a loop closure is
detected, a signal is sent to the two corresponding agents,
triggering information exchange and fusion. This includes

<!-- page 11 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
11
Dataset
Year
Scenes
Sensor Modalities
GroundTruth
GT Method
Description
Ind.
Out.
RGB
Depth
Lidar
IMU
Pose
3D Map
Pose
3D Map
Tanks and Temples [63]
ToG’17
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
ICP
Laser Scanner
High-quality Object-centric Scenes
RealEstate10k [64]
ToG’18
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
COLMAP
✗
Video clips on YouTube captured from a moving camera
NeRF-LLFF [65]
SIG’19
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
COLMAP
✗
Images of various indoor scenes and objects.
ACID [66]
ICCV’21
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
COLMAP
✗
A dataset of aerial landscape videos
Mip-NeRF 360 [67]
CVPR’22
✓
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
COLMAP
✗
Outdoor and indoor scenes with 360-degree scene perspectives
LocalRF [68]
CVPR’23
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
COLMAP
✗
Large-scale outdoor dataset, Static hikes
MITDARPA [69]
IJRR’10
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✗
✓
✗
GPS
✗
Urban scenes mapping and localization
UTIAS [70]
IJRR’11
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
Motion Capture
✗
Multi-agent indoor scenes mapping and localization
Ford Campus [71]
IJRR’11
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
GPS
✗
Campus scenes mapping and localization
TUM RGB-D [25]
IROS’12
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
Motion Capture
✗
Various indoor scenes for mapping and localization
KITTI [72]
IJRR’13
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
GNSS/INS
✗
A city-scale dataset created for autonomous driving research
NCLT [73]
IJRR’16
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
GNSS/INS
✗
Long-term campus scenes mapping and localization
ShapeNet [74]
arXiv’15
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
Simulation
CAD
A richly-annotated, large-scale dataset of 3D shapes
Euroc [75]
IJRR’16
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓
✗
Motion Capture
✗
Various indoor scenes for mapping and localization
Oxford RobotCar [76]
IJRR’17
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
GNSS
✗
A city-scale dataset created for autonomous driving research
ScanNet [24]
CVPR’17
✗
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
SLAM
✗
A richly-annotated multiple room scenes with semantic label
Replica [23]
arXiv’19
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✗
Simulation
Simulation
Highly photo-realistic 3D indoor scene dataset at room scale
Nuscenes [77]
CVPR’20
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
GNSS/INS
✗
A city-scale dataset created for autonomous driving research
Waymo [78]
CVPR’20
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
GNSS/INS
✗
A city-scale dataset created for autonomous driving research
UMA-VI [79]
IJRR’20
✓
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓
✗
Motion Capture
✗
Various indoor scenes for mapping and localization with Hand-held equipment
TartanAir [80]
IROS’20
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✗
Simulation
✗
A Large-scale dataset with various light conditions, weather, and moving objects
NTU VIRAL [81]
IJRR’22
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
TLS
✗
A dataset of aerial mapping and localization
ScanNet++ [82]
ICCV’23
✓
✗
✓
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓
SLAM
Laser Scanner
A large-scale dataset with high-quality and geometry and color of indoor scenes.
SubT-MRS [83]
CVPR’24
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
GNSS/INS
✗
Mapping and localization under diverse all-weather conditions
MCD [84]
CVPR’24
✗
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
MCTR
Laser Scanner
A multi-campus dataset focus on semantic and SLAM
MARS-LVIG [85]
IJRR’24
✗
✓
✓
✗
✓
✓
✓
✗
GNSS/INS
✗
Aerial downward-looking SLAM dataset
Ours
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
✓
MCTR
Laser Scanner
A large-scale indoor and outdoor dataset with a widerange of sensing
modalities and high-accuracy groundtruth for both single-agent and multi-agent
TABLE I: List of commonly used datasets for neural mapping and localization. We provide the first dataset that includes both
high-precision trajectory ground truth and 3D mesh ground truth. It covers indoor and outdoor scenes, incorporates multiple
sensor modalities, and includes both single-agent and multi-agent sequences.
Methods
Reconstruction
Localization
Agent 1
Agent 2
Global
Agent 1
Agent 2
Global
Acc. ↓
Comp. ↓
Comp.Ratio(%) ↑
Acc. ↓
Comp. ↓
Comp.Ratio(%) ↑
Acc. ↓
Comp. ↓
Comp.Ratio(%) ↑
RMSE ↓
RMSE ↓
RMSE ↓
Single-Agent Methods
iMAP [12]
4.812
4.519
76.378
3.663
3.582
81.352
2.881
4.934
80.515
3.481
3.773
4.153
NICE-SLAM [13]
3.035
3.907
85.894
2.163
2.881
90.792
2.373
2.645
91.137
1.657
1.767
2.503
ESLAM [14]
1.838
1.979
93.317
1.857
1.884
94.531
2.082
1.754
96.014
0.593
0.579
0.657
CoSLAM [15]
1.758
2.153
92.894
1.949
2.033
93.413
2.104
2.082
93.435
1.001
0.934
1.059
GOSLAM [44]
2.931
3.759
86.484
2.245
2.678
90.571
2.091
2.415
93.174
0.334
0.451
0.404
Point-SLAM [42]
2.324
3.455
86.811
1.925
3.102
90.975
1.935
2.779
90.479
0.534
0.461
0.559
PLGSLAM [16]
1.793
2.012
93.415
1.983
1.773
94.669
1.884
1.543
96.329
0.584
0.607
0.631
Loopy-SLAM [45]
1.935
3.107
89.894
1.683
2.783
91.792
1.593
2.645
91.137
0.257
0.362
0.369
Multi-Agent Methods
CP-SLAM [22]
2.271
3.457
86.429
1.834
2.901
90.115
1.794
2.455
90.394
0.613
0.639
0.673
MNE-SLAM [61]
1.731
1.932
93.692
1.797
1.685
95.458
1.681
1.509
96.957
0.284
0.358
0.398
MCN-SLAM (Ours)
1.728
1.929
93.712
1.793
1.683
95.465
1.679
1.519
96.969
0.280
0.353
0.392
TABLE II: Multi-agent SLAM performance on the Replica dataset [23]. We evaluate the reconstruction and localization
performance of Agent1, Agent2, and global(global scene reconstruction and camera tracking). We present the evaluation
results of the reconstruction and trajectory outcomes for different agents, as well as the scene reconstruction and trajectory
results of the global map. The results are the average of the scenes in the Replica dataset. Our method outperforms existing
methods in surface reconstruction and pose estimation. Best results are highlighted as first , second , and third .
transmitting the keyframe poses and network parameters of
two agents, optimizing the keyframe pairs between the agents.
By using the aligned poses and the keyframe depths, we can
obtain the boundaries of the two agents’ maps and compute
the overlap region. The maps are then quickly fused using
the distillation method. The different agents work simultane-
ously and merge submaps in real-time. Only the keyframe
features, keyframe poses, and the network parameters for map
construction are exchanged, and all computations performed
locally on each agent. Compared to the traditional sparse point
cloud map representation used in multi-agent systems, the
neural implicit scene representation reduces the amount of
information required for communication. Sparse point cloud
maps tend to grow explosively as operation time and map
scale increase.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We evaluate the performance of our method on a wide
range of publicly available datasets as well as real-world
experiments. The evaluation covers diverse environments, in-
cluding small-room scenes, multi-room layouts, long corridors,
and large-scale outdoor scenes. We collect a new large-scale
dataset, Dense SLAM datasets(DES), to further benchmark
our system. Experimental results demonstrate that our method
consistently outperforms existing single-agent and multi-agent
SLAM methods in terms of surface reconstruction quality,
pose estimation accuracy, and real-time performance.
Datasets. We evaluate MCN-SLAM on a variety of scenes
from different datasets.
• Replica Dataset [23]. 8 small room scenes (nearly
6.5m × 4.2m × 2.7m with 2000 images). We partitioned
the dataset into two subsets, each corresponding to the
trajectory of one agent, and ensured that there is overlap

<!-- page 12 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
12
Methods
Reconstruction
Agent 1
Agent 2
Global
Depth L1 (cm)
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 (cm)
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 (cm)
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Single-Agent Methods
iMAP [12]
3.15
23.19
0.772
0.272
3.21
23.41
0.760
0.278
3.18
23.33
0.769
0.274
NICE-SLAM [13]
3.01
24.28
0.820
0.250
2.96
24.57
0.799
0.257
2.98
24.43
0.809
0.254
ESLAM [14]
1.16
28.36
0.920
0.244
1.21
27.83
0.927
0.248
1.19
28.06
0.923
0.246
Co-SLAM [15]
1.47
26.56
0.876
0.263
1.50
26.39
0.870
0.266
1.51
26.46
0.873
0.269
GO-SLAM [44]
3.01
23.88
0.820
0.298
2.96
23.17
0.799
0.317
3.38
23.53
0.801
0.305
PLGSLAM [16]
1.14
28.36
0.919
0.242
1.20
27.83
0.925
0.248
1.17
28.16
0.922
0.244
Multi-Agent Methods
CP-SLAM [22]
1.18
28.16
0.896
0.249
1.23
27.59
0.910
0.258
1.31
27.96
0.911
0.261
MNE-SLAM [61]
0.83
30.79
0.960
0.202
0.90
30.09
0.955
0.204
0.87
30.41
0.953
0.208
Ours
0.81
30.85
0.962
0.200
0.88
30.25
0.953
0.199
0.84
30.58
0.961
0.204
TABLE III: Multi-agent rendering and reconstruction performance on the Replica dataset [23]. We evaluate the rendering
performance of Agent1, Agent2, and global(global scene reconstruction and camera tracking). The results are the average of
the scenes in the Replica dataset. Our method outperforms existing methods in RGB and depth rendering.
Methods
Apartment-1
Apartment-2
Apartment-0
Agent 1
Agent 2
Global
Agent 1
Agent 2
Global
Agent 1
Agent 2
Global
RMSE[cm]/Mean[cm]/Median[cm]
RMSE[cm]/Mean[cm]/Median[cm]
RMSE[cm]/Mean[cm]/Median[cm]
Single-Agent Methods
ORB-SLAM3 [86]
4.93/4.65/5.01
4.93/4.04/3.80
4.93/4.35/4.41
1.35/1.05/0.65
1.36/1.24/1.11
1.36/1.15/0.88
0.67/0.58/0.47
1.46/1.11/0.79
1.07/0.85/0.63
NICE-SLAM [13]
55.4/53.4/50.9
21.6/20.3/19.4
38.5/36.4/35.9
5.70/5.53/5.25
2.99/2.79/2.51
4.35/4.15/4.01
2.17/2.01/1.93
2.21/2.03/1.94
2.18/2.05/1.97
Co-SLAM [15]
2.86/2.74/2.58
3.51/3.40/3.24
3.19/2.95/2.77
1.44/1.32/1.27
1.64/1.45/1.39
1.54/1.44/1.38
0.83/0.74/0.67
0.78/0.73/0.0.67
0.83/0.75/0.68
ESLAM [14]
1.38/1.29/1.17
0.95/0.89/0.81
1.17/1.07/0.98
0.84/0.76/0.69
0.75/0.69/0.61
0.79/0.73/0.67
0.58/0.53/0.49
0.95/0.88/0.81
0.76/0.70/0.65
GO-SLAM [44]
1.45/1.38/1.30
1.33/1.21/1.16
1.27/1.12/1.01
0.49/0.45/0.43
0.78/0.74/0.70
0.62/0.58/0.53
0.47/0.44/0.41
0.56/0.52/0.49
0.53/0.50/0.48
Point-SLAM [42]
1.31/1.23/1.11
2.09/1.98/1.77
1.63/1.51/1.38
0.53/0.47/0.42
0.80/0.76/0.73
0.68/0.62/0.57
0.49/0.46/0.42
0.62/0.58/0.55
0.58/0.55/0.53
PLGSLAM [16]
1.33/1.26/1.18
1.06/0.99/0.91
1.13/1.06/0.98
0.82/0.77/0.70
0.73/0.68/0.65
0.79/0.74/0.71
0.56/0.53/0.51
0.93/0.87/0.83
0.74/0.69/0.66
Loopy-SLAM [45]
1.19/1.07/0.98
1.66/1.53/1.44
1.43/1.35/1.26
0.55/0.51/0.48
0.66/0.61/0.53
0.60/0.53/0.48
0.46/0.42/0.40
0.82/0.79/0.76
0.64/0.61/0.58
Multi-Agent Methods
CCM-SLAM [56]
2.12/1.94/1.74
9.31/6.36/5.57
5.71/4.15/3.66
0.51/0.45/0.40
0.74/0.70/0.68
0.62/0.59/0.57
-/-/-
-/-/-
-/-/-
Swarm-SLAM [58]
4.62/4.17/3.90
6.50/5.27/4.39
5.56/4.72/4.15
2.69/2.48/2.34
8.53/7.59/7.10
5.61/5.04/4.72
1.61/1.33/1.09
1.98/1.48/0.94
1.80/1.41/1.02
CP-SLAM [22]
6.21/5.56/5.27
5.67/5.37/4.67
5.73/5.26/4.77
1.45/1.43/1.39
2.48/2.32/2.27
1.85/1.68/1.73
0.62/0.47/0.30
1.28/1.17/1.37
0.91/0.78/0.80
MNE-SLAM [61]
1.21/1.09/1.07
0.99/0.88/0.94
1.02/1.01/0.99
0.43/0.41/0.40
0.74/0.72/0.70
0.59/0.58/0.55
0.43/0.41/0.40
0.54/0.51/0.50
0.48/0.46/0.45
Ours
1.18/1.06/1.04
0.97/0.87/0.93
1.00/1.00/0.96
0.41/0.39/0.38
0.71/0.70/0.68
0.57/0.56/0.53
0.42/0.40/0.38
0.52/0.49/0.48
0.46/0.44/0.43
TABLE IV: Multi-agent tracking performance in the Apartment dataset [23]. ATE RMSE(↓), Mean(↓) and Median(↓) are used
as evaluation metrics. Following the setting of [22], we quantitatively evaluated respective trajectories (part 1 and part 2) and
average results of the two agents. ”-” indicates invalid results due to the failure of CCM-SLAM. Our method achieve SOTA
performance compared with other existing methods.
between the two subsets. We use this dataset to evaluate
the reconstruction and localization accuracy in small-
scale environments.
• ScanNet dataset
[24]. Real-world scenes with long se-
quences (more than 5000 images) and large-scale indoor
scenarios. (nearly 7.5m × 6.6m × 3.5m). We use this
dataset for large-scale real-world indoor environments.
• Apartment dataset from [23]. Multi-rooms scene (nearly
10.8m×8.3m×3.2m with more than 6000 images). We
use this dataset for multi-room environments.
• TUM RGB-D dataset from [25], we use this classic
SLAM dataset to evalute the camera tracking perfor-
mance of our framework and compare with traditional
SLAM framework.
• Our own dataset for Dense SLAM systems (DES dataset).
This is the first real-world dataset for all kinds of neural
SLAM systems with high-accuracy ground-truth for both
camera trajectory and 3D reconstruction mesh. We col-
lected single-agent and multi-agent datasets from various
indoor environments, ranging from small room scenes
(nearly 35m2) to large-scale outdoor scenes (>276,000
m2), accumulating a total of 500,000 camera frames.
The details are shown in Fig. 6,7. We present detailed
information on the dataset sequences and the specifica-
Reconstruction Metrics
Definition
Depth L1 [cm]
1
N
P(
di −d∗
i
)/di
Accuracy [cm]
P
p∈P
 minq∈Q ∥p −q∥

/|P|
Completion [cm]
P
q∈Q
 minp∈P ∥p −q∥

/|Q|
Completion Ratio [< 5cm%]
P
q∈Q
 minp∈P ∥p −q∥< 0.05

/|Q|
TABLE V: Definitions of scene reconstruction metrics used
for evaluation of surface reconstruction quality.
tions of the sensors. The dataset will be open-sourced on
https://dtc111111.github.io/DES-dataset/.
Metrics. Following Neural-RGBD [88] and GO-Surf [89],
we perform frustum and occlusion mesh culling that removes
unobserved regions outside frustum and the noisy points within
the camera frustum but outside the target scene. Follow [15],
We introduce a modification to the culling strategy used
for the quantitative evaluation of the reconstruction accu-
racy, which leads to a fairer comparison. We use the frus-
tum+occlusion+virtul camera culling method. This method
simulates virtual camera views that cover the occluded regions.
After mesh culling, we use Depth L1 (cm), Accuracy (cm),
Completion (cm), and Completion ratio (%) to evaluate the
reconstruction quality. The Depth L1 is defined as the average
L1 difference between rendered GT depth and rendered depth.
In Tab. V, we present the 3D reconstruction metrics. We first

<!-- page 13 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
13
Fig. 8: Visualization of the indoor and outdoor robot platform: Scout robot, Weston Robot, Songling Robot and camera and
lidar sensors in our DES dataset.
Fig. 9: Visualization of the indoor and outdoor 3D Groundtruth
collection platform Leica-rtc360 in our DES dataset.
uniformly sample two point clouds P and Q from both GT and
reconstructed meshes, with |P| = |Q| = 200000. Accuracy
metric is defined as the average distance between a point
on GT mesh to its nearest point on reconstructed mesh. The
Completion metric is defined as the average distance between
a point on reconstructed mesh to its nearest point on GT mesh.
The Completion Ratio metric refers to the proportion of the
overall ground truth (GT) where the average distance between
a point on the reconstructed mesh and its nearest point on the
GT mesh is less than the threshold t. For indoor scenes, such
as Replica [23], ScanNet [24], and Apartment [23] datasets,
we set the threshold to 5 cm for completion ratio thresholds.
For 2D metrics, we use PSNR↑, SSIM↑, LPIPS↓metrics.
We render RGB and depth images along with the trajectory of
camera. For the evaluation of camera tracking, we adopt ATE
RMSE(cm), Mean(cm), Median(cm). For the camera trajec-
tories generated by CCM-SLAM [56], we align them with
the Ground Truth camera trajectory using Sim(3) Umeyama
alignment in the EVO tool. As for the camera trajectories pro-
duced by other methods, we align them with the Ground Truth
camera trajectory by aligning the origin. Trajectory alignment
is crucial for proper drift and loop closure evaluation. To
be specific, after aligning the initial poses, we calculate the
Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) for each pose and compute
Methods
0000
0059
0106
0169
0181
0207
0054
0233
Avg.
Single-Agent Methods
NICE-SLAM [13]
12.0
14.0
7.9
10.9
13.4
6.5
20.9
9.0
13.0
ESLAM [14]
7.3
8.5
7.5
7.5
9.0
6.2
36.3
4.6
10.6
Co-SLAM [15]
7.1
11.1
9.4
7.1
11.8
7.1
14.8
-
-
Point-SLAM [42]
10.2
7.8
8.7
22.2
14.8
9.5
28.0
6.1
14.3
GO-SLAM [44]
5.4
7.5
7.0
7.7
6.8
6.9
8.8
4.8
6.9
PLGSLAM [16]
7.3
8.2
7.4
7.5
9.2
5.8
30.8
4.2
9.9
Loopy-SLAM [45]
5.2
7.9
8.5
7.7
10.6
7.9
14.5
5.2
7.7
Multi-Agent Methods
Swarm-SLAM [58]
10.7
8.7
9.5
12.5
13.8
8.4
14.5
6.5
10.5
CP-SLAM [22]
7.6
8.9
8.8
8.1
10.8
8.3
20.1
5.6
9.7
MNE-SLAM [61]
5.0
7.3
6.6
7.3
6.4
6.4
8.5
4.3
6.6
Ours
4.7
7.0
6.5
7.2
6.2
6.2
8.3
4.2
6.4
TABLE VI: Multi-agent (two agents) camera tracking perfor-
mance on ScanNet dataset [24]. We use ATE RMSE(cm) as the
metric. We select 8 sequences follow the setting from previous
methods.
the RMSE, Mean, and Median values.
Baseline Methods. We compare our multi-agent method with
the current state-of-the-art baseline methods, including tradi-
tional methods, single-agent NeRF-SLAM methods, 3DGS-
SLAM methods, and multi-agent NeRF-SLAM methods. For
the traditional methods, we choose ORB-SLAM3 [86], BAD-
SLAM [90], Kintinuous [8], ElasticFusion [9], BundleFu-
sion [91]. For single-agent nerf-based methods, we choose
DI-Fusion [92], NICE-SLAM [13], Vox-Fusion [93], MIPS-
Fusion [40], Point-SLAM [42], ESLAM [14], Co-SLAM [15],
PLGSLAM [16], GO-SLAM [44], Loopy-SLAM [45]. We
also choose a 3DGS-based SLAM method, Photo-SLAM [94].
For multi-agents methods, we choose CCM-SLAM [56],
Swarm-SLAM [58], and CP-SLAM [22]. Since recent multi-
agent methods (Kimera-Multi [21], D2SLAM [59]) are based
on tightly-coupled camera-IMU systems and are not designed
for dense mapping, we exclude these methods from our
comparison.
Implementation. We employ feature planes with a resolution
of 24 cm for coarse tri-planes. we use L = 16 level HashGrid
with from Rmin = 16 to Rmax, where we use max voxel
size 2cm for determining Rmax. All feature planes have 32
channels, resulting in a 64-channel concatenated feature input
for the decoders. The decoders are two-layer MLPs with 32
channels in the hidden layer. The dimension of the geometric
feature z is 15. ReLU activation function is used for the
hidden layer, and Tanh and Sigmoid are respectively used for

<!-- page 14 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
14
Fig. 10: Two-agent experiments on the ScanNet dataset [24] Scene 0000, 0233. We present Qualitative comparison of our
proposed our method’s 3D surface reconstruction with existing NeRF-based dense visual SLAM methods, Co-SLAM [15], and
ESLAM [14]. The region outlined on the image is marked in red to signify lower reconstruction accuracy, in green to signify
higher accuracy, and in yellow to represent the groundtruth results. The experiment results demonstrates the effectiveness of
the proposed scene representation method.
the output layers of TSDF and raw colors. We use 16 bins
for One-Blob encoding of each dimension. For Replica [23]
dataset, we sample K = 32 points for regular sampling and
Ksurface = 11 points for depth-guided sampling on each ray.
We use 200 iterations for first frame mapping. We perform 10
optimization iterations for mapping and randomly select 4000
rays for each iteration. And for ScanNet [24] dataset, we set
K = 96 and Ksurface = 21. Also, we perform 30 optimization
iterations for mapping in ScanNet scenes. For the scenes in
Apartment dataset [13], we similarly set K = 96 and Ksurface
= 21. For this dataset, We perform 30 optimization iterations
for mapping, and we randomly sample 5000 rays for each
iteration. We use the RAFT [62] feature to select proporiate
keyframe for jointly optimizing the hybrid scene representation
network, and camera poses of the selected keyframes. We add
a keyframe when the average flow is greater than or equal
to 4 pixels. We use Adam [95] for optimizing all learnable
parameters of our method. Once all input frames are processed,
and for evaluation purposes, we build a TSDF volume for each
scene and use the marching cubes algorithm [96] to obtain 3D
meshes.
A. Dataset Collection
We introduce a large-scale Neural SLAM dataset that spans
a diverse range of scenarios, from small indoor rooms to
expansive outdoor environments. The dataset encompasses
both single-agent and multi-agent settings, providing high-
quality 3D mesh ground truth and continuous-time trajectory
ground truth. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first
large-scale dataset for the dense SLAM to offer both 3D
map ground truth and trajectory ground truth. We believe this
dataset has the potential to significantly advance research and
innovation within the SLAM community.
Sensor Suit and Robot Platform In Fig. 8, we present the
four robotic platforms used for dataset collection, along with
detailed sensor information, such as cameras and LiDAR. We
use Scout robot and Weston Robot to collect data in indoor
scenes. As for outdoor scenes, we use three Songling robot
and a weston robot to collect data.
Calibration The calibration process involves finding the cam-
era intrinsics and the extrinsics of all sensors. First, the Kalibr
toolbox is used to find the intrinsic parameters of the D455
cameras. These intrinsic parameters are then used to find
the extrinsic of the camera setup on each D455 w.r.t. each
IMU available. Finally, we perform a pose-graph optimization
over the graph to obtain the final extrinsic of all sensors and
summarize them in the calibration report.
3D Groundtruth Map 3D survey-grade mapping of the
campuses was done by using various industrial laser scanners.
The 3D groundtruth map collection platform is shown in
Fig. 9. We visualize the collection platform Leica-rtc360 in
our DES dataset of the indoor and outdoor 3D Groundtruth.
In essence, It acquires point cloud data from discrete, static
locations by means of ground-based, high-resolution 3D laser
scanners. These individual scans are then combined to produce
a complete 3D point cloud via co-visible landmarks (both
man-made and natural) and propriety global scan matching
software. point cloud data consists of 3D point coordinates and
may also include intensity or RGB channels. Scanning each
section took between several days, requiring at least two field
operators. Upon completion of the scanning process, all indi-
vidual scans were registered in the manufacturer’s software.
Registration of individual scans in each of the sections was
performed solely on the basis of the artificial sphere targets
recorded in the scans. Cloud-to-cloud registration was then
used to align the sections and create the final point cloud of the

<!-- page 15 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
15
Fig. 11: Multi-agent (four agents) experiments on our DES dataset. We present Qualitative results of our proposed method’s 3D
surface reconstruction with existing SOTA method: ESLAM [14] on the long corridor sequence. The left side shows the fused
mesh map reconstructed by four agents after collaborative SLAM. On the right is the zoomed-in view of the reconstructed
mesh. The region outlined on the image is marked in red to signify lower reconstruction accuracy, in green to signify higher
accuracy, and in yellow to represent the ground truth results. The right figure showcases the visualizations of the mesh and
the corresponding normal maps.
Fig. 12: Multi-agent (Two-agents) experiments of our proposed method’s surface reconstruction with existing SOTA method:
ESLAM [14], Co-SLAM [15] on the ScanNet dataset [24] Scene 0054. The top shows the reconstructed mesh, while the
bottom displays zoomed-in normal images.
entire area. Target-based statistics showed a maximum distance
error of less than 10 mm for all sphere pairings that were
used in the registration optimization process. Building walls
and corners were spot-checked for overlap of scans. A total
of 10 reference measurements were made with a total station
to verify the global accuracy of the point cloud. The results
showed a maximum distance error of less than 5 cm over than
entire length of the campus, which is below the resolution
of the point cloud. We get the 3D mesh use the groundtruth
point cloud with Poisson Surface Reconstruction and TSDF
fusion. Due to space constraints, we have included the dataset
visualizations in the supplementary material, as shown in
Fig. 6. We present several viewpoints from the dataset, with
the bottom-right corner showing the 3D ground truth for
some scenes. Additionally, following the tools provided in
iMAP [12], users can also generate custom camera trajectories
along with corresponding RGB and depth images using the 3D
ground truth by themselves.
Trajectory Groundtruth Many existing datasets face chal-
lenges related to the accuracy of ground truth estimates, shown
in Tab. I. GNSS/INS is the most commonly used localization
method for automotive vehicles, often exhibits errors at the
decimeter level. The Motion Capture system is alos primarily
effective indoors or in low-light conditions. MoCap offer ac-
curacy at the centimeter to millimeter level with clear line-of-
sight. Two commonly used methods for trajectory estimation
through point cloud matching are Normal Distributions Trans-
form (NDT) and Iterative Closest Point (ICP). However, these
methods often introduce errors in the range of a few decime-
ters. Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) uses
onboard LIDAR sensors but may suffer from long-term drift
and is generally considered less accurate, with measurement
noise ranging from a few decimeters to several meters. We use
a prior map continuous time registration (MCTR) method [84]
and CTE-MLO [97] to provide centimeter-level accuracy
without any line-of-sight requirements, making it a promising

<!-- page 16 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
16
Methods
Agent1
Agent2
Agent3
Agent4
Training View
Novel View
Training View
Novel View
Training View
Novel View
Training View
Novel View
PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓PNSR↑SSIM↑LPIPS↓
Single-Agent Methods
Co-SLAM [15]
14.7
0.49
0.79
14.2
0.39
0.89
14.9
0.50
0.78
14.2
0.39
0.87
14.3
0.47
0.80
13.9
0.39
0.89
15.3
0.49
0.79
14.5
0.41
0.88
ESLAM [14]
25.8
0.84
0.51
19.8
0.79
0.50
25.9
0.85
0.51
19.8
0.80
0.49
25.4
0.82
0.52
19.3
0.79
0.50
26.4
0.84
0.51
20.2
0.80
0.49
Point-SLAM [42]
26.5
0.86
0.49
25.9
0.85
0.43
26.8
0.87
0.48
25.9
0.85
0.43
26.7
0.84
0.48
25.4
0.84
0.43
26.9
0.86
0.49
26.1
0.86
0.42
PLGSLAM [16]
25.9
0.85
0.49
20.3
0.81
0.49
26.1
0.86
0.48
20.3
0.81
0.48
25.5
0.84
0.51
19.9
0.80
0.49
26.2
0.85
0.49
20.8
0.82
0.48
Photo-SLAM [94]
28.3
0.86
0.43
25.7
0.84
0.44
28.7
0.86
0.43
25.7
0.85
0.44
28.0
0.85
0.45
25.2
0.84
0.45
28.7
0.86
0.43
25.9
0.85
0.43
Multi-Agent Methods
CP-SLAM [22]
14.3
0.47
0.82
-
-
-
14.7
0.47
0.80
-
-
-
14.5
0.46
0.84
-
-
-
14.9
0.47
0.82
-
-
-
MNE-SLAM [61]
29.5
0.88
0.41
27.8
0.87
0.42
30.0
0.89
0.39
28.2
0.88
0.41
29.1
0.87
0.40
27.2
0.81
0.43
30.1
0.89
0.39
28.3
0.89
0.39
Ours
30.2
0.92
0.38
28.5
0.90
0.39
30.7
0.92
0.37
28.9
0.90
0.39
29.5
0.89
0.40
27.9
0.88
0.41
30.8
0.91
0.39
28.9
0.90
0.38
TABLE VII: Quantitative rendering results of multi-agent (four agents) experiments. We compare our proposed framework
with the existing SLAM systems on DES dataset (long corridor sequence) with projected depth images.
Methods
Agent1
Agent2
Agent3
Agent4
Global
Acc.↓Comp.↓Comp.Ratio(%)↑Acc.↓Comp.↓Comp.Ratio(%)↑Acc.↓Comp.↓Comp.Ratio(%)↑Acc.↓Comp.↓Comp.Ratio(%)↑Acc.↓Comp.↓Comp.Ratio(%)↑
Single-Agent Methods
Co-SLAM [15]
47.71
95.85
27.47
93.74 144.39
6.94
77.90
76.31
26.62
245.27 195.41
1.47
-
-
-
ESLAM [14]
37.66
33.94
54.31
87.60
31.43
41.87
89.73
14.94
65.84
102.13
46.44
43.87
73.78
17.60
58.49
GO-SLAM [44]
52.74
48.47
30.48
94.39
44.93
31.49
101.37
29.31
40.13
142.59
89.33
30.15
109.12 133.15
10.53
Point-SLAM [42]
39.45
34.77
34.15
91.61
37.27
35.87
93.49
21.12
44.26
139.51
52.34
26.15
-
-
-
PLGSLAM [16]
37.29
33.47
55.19
84.14
30.47
43.49
85.19
14.81
67.15
99.19
42.16
46.91
70.42
15.49
59.37
Photo-SLAM [94] 50.15
43.29
34.17
89.11
30.25
45.81
87.14
27.56
47.39
98.59
63.49
31.78
60.61
139.89
10.75
Loopy-SLAM [45] 37.25
41.14
36.13
88.65
45.29
28.85
91.26
20.93
46.15
128.28
51.81
29.05
-
-
-
Multi-Agent Methods
CP-SLAM [22]
44.01
92.09
29.79
91.43 142.08
9.14
73.74
73.36
24.75
242.11 164.46
4.18
-
-
-
MNE-SLAM [61]
37.21
33.45
55.29
62.23
14.22
68.03
46.09
14.83
64.76
68.95
13.34
75.71
43.96
14.69
64.00
Ours
37.03
33.41
55.85
62.09
14.16
68.58
46.04
14.79
67.37
68.74
13.29
75.85
43.89
14.58
64.43
TABLE VIII: Multi-agents (four agents) scene reconstruction performance on DES dataset (Long corridor scene) with sensor
depth images. “-” indicates invalid results due to the failure or inability of these methods.
Methods
fr1/desk
fr1/desk2
fr1/room
fr2/xyz
fr3/office
Avg.
RMSE/Mean RMSE/Mean RMSE/Mean RMSE/Mean RMSE/Mean RMSE/Mean
Traditional Methods
BAD-SLAM [90]
1.75/1.68
N/A
N/A
1.14/1.09
1.74/1.70
N/A
Kintinuous [8]
3.74/3.57
7.15/7.03
7.54/7.38
2.95/2.81
3.03/2.90
4.88/4.69
ORBSLAM3 [86]
1.64/1.57
2.24/2.13
4.65/4.45
0.44/0.40
1.06/1.02
2.02/1.92
ElasticFusion [9]
2.53/2.41
6.83/6.41
21.49/19.96
1.17/1.04
2.52/2.34
6.91/6.65
BundleFusion [91]
1.65/1.57
N/A
N/A
1.15/1.04
2.25/2.13
N/A
Neural-based Methods
DI-Fusion [92]
4.45/4.21
N/A
N/A
2.04/1.98
5.88/5.67
N/A
NICE-SLAM [13]
4.26/4.01
4.99/4.68
34.49/33.12
6.19/5.86
3.87/3.67
10.76/10.19
Vox-Fusion [93]
3.52/3.41
6.00/5.47
19.53/18.37
1.49/1.27
26.01/25.31 11.31/10.84
MIPS-Fusion [40]
3.04/2.71
N/A
N/A
1.44/1.31
4.63/4.31
N/A
Point-SLAM [42]
4.34/4.09
4.54/4.28
30.92/29.45
1.31/1.18
3.48/3.27
8.92/7.91
ESLAM [14]
2.47/2.35
3.69/3.46
29.73/28.31
1.11/1.02
2.42/2.25
7.89/7.03
Co-SLAM [15]
2.40/2.25
N/A
N/A
1.74/1.64
2.45/2.27
N/A
PLGSLAM [16]
2.45/2.31
3.67/3.34
29.61/28.08
1.10/1.06
2.40/2.24
7.85/7.47
GO-SLAM [44]
1.52/1.43
2.78/2.62
4.64/4.41
0.69/0.65
1.39/1.31
2.20/2.08
Loopy-SLAM [45]
3.79/3.45
3.38/3.15
7.03/6.29
1.62/1.51
3.41/3.24
3.85/3.52
Ours
1.42/1.33
2.45/2.27
4.50/4.23
0.62/0.58
1.31/1.20
2.06/1.92
TABLE IX: Single agent experiments on camera track-
ing
performance
on
TUM-RGBD
[25]
(ATE
RMSE
↓(cm)/Mean(cm)↓). shows competitive performance on a va-
riety of scenes.
Methods
Agent1
Agent2
Agent3
Agent4
Global
Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE Mean RMSE
Single-Agent Methods
ORB-SLAM3 [86]
0.43
0.47
0.31
0.35
0.29
0.32
0.31
0.36
0.76
0.80
Co-SLAM [15]
10.22 12.05 12.46 14.99
9.29
11.97
9.33
10.47 16.84 18.80
ESLAM [14]
1.22
1.33
0.45
0.51
0.31
0.39
0.68
0.81
1.10
1.23
GO-SLAM [44]
0.13
0.17
0.43
0.48
0.21
0.24
0.33
0.37
3.76
4.36
Point-SLAM [42]
2.11
2.25
1.14
1.19
0.87
0.93
1.35
1.41
2.83
2.95
Photo-SLAM [94]
0.39
0.41
0.28
0.31
0.26
0.29
0.27
0.29
0.43
0.45
Loopy-SLAM [45]
1.31
1.47
0.93
0.99
0.74
0.69
1.15
1.03
1.95
2.01
Multi-Agent Methods
CP-SLAM [22]
12.89 14.56
5.63
5.98
10.01 11.63
9.47
10.49
9.50
10.67
Swarm-SLAM [58] 0.49
0.53
0.35
0.39
0.36
0.39
0.41
0.45
0.82
0.85
MNE-SLAM [61]
0.07
0.08
0.10
0.12
0.05
0.06
0.06
0.05
0.38
0.40
Ours
0.06
0.07
0.10
0.12
0.04
0.05
0.05
0.05
0.35
0.38
TABLE X: Multi-agent camera tracking performance on DES
dataset (Long corridor scene) with sensor depth images. “-”
indicates invalid results due to the failure or inability of these
methods.
Fig. 13: Multi-agent (Two agents) experiments of our pro-
posed method’s surface reconstruction with existing SOTA
method CP-SLAM [22] on the Replica dataset and Apartment
dataset [23]. A colorbar indicating trajectory RMSE is shown
below each figure, where red represents higher error and blue
indicates lower error.
choice for creating large datasets with centimeter accuracy.
Users can use CEVA (Continuous-time Evaluation) [84] which
is a python wrapper for the basalt, library to make working
with continuous-time trajectory ground truth easy. In many
aspects, CEVA exceeds the basalt library in its utilities.
Comparison with other datasets In Tab. I, we have reviewed
and compared existing datasets from various perspectives,
including indoor versus outdoor scenes, sensor modalities
(camera, depth, LiDAR, IMU), the availability of ground
truth for pose and 3D maps (critical for dense SLAM), the
methods used to obtain pose and 3D map ground truth, and
a brief description of each dataset. The upper half of the
comparison table focuses on 3D reconstruction datasets, while
the lower half are SLAM datasets. It is evident that current

<!-- page 17 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
17
Fig. 14: Visualization of rendering performance of four agents experiments on DES dataset (indoor corridor sequence). We
present the rendered training views and novel views. We compare our proposed method’s rendering performance with existing
SOTA methods on our DES dataset.
Methods
Mean [m]↓
Median [m]↓
RMSE [m]↓
Single-Agent Methods
ORB-SLAM3 [86]
3.98
3.57
4.13
Co-SLAM [15]
-
-
-
ESLAM [14]
6.54
6.27
7.13
GO-SLAM [44]
2.59
1.98
3.03
PLGSLAM [16]
6.31
6.01
6.89
PhotoSLAM [94]
3.58
3.17
3.27
Multi-Agent Methods
CP-SLAM [22]
8.51
8.37
9.45
MNE-SLAM [61]
2.44
1.92
2.94
Ours
2.38
1.86
2.89
TABLE XI: Camera Tracking Performance on DES dataset
(outdoor carpark scene) with sensor depth images. “-” indi-
cates invalid results due to the failure or inability of these
methods.
Fig. 15: Outdoor experiments of our proposed framework’s
camera tracking performance on the outdoor carpark sequence
of DES dataset.
SLAM datasets do not include 3D map ground truth, while
3D reconstruction datasets are generally unsuitable for SLAM
methods. For instance, the ScanNet++ dataset contains non-
time-continuous trajectories with numerous abrupt jumps and
teleportations, making it incompatible with SLAM systems.
Our dataset is the first Neural SLAM dataset to provide both
high-precision 3D map and trajectory ground truth. It features
diverse sensor modalities and spans a wide range of scenes,
from small indoor rooms to large-scale campus environments,
offering a comprehensive large-scale dataset for advancing
SLAM research.
B. Experimental Results
Scene reconstruction
We evaluate the 3D scene recon-
struction performance of our method on the Replica [23],
ScanNet [24], Apartment [23], and our own dataset DES. As
shown in Tab. II, We demonstrate the effectiveness of our
method across eight small room scenes. We present the two
agents reconstruction results and the global scene reconstruc-
tion performance in small room scenarios. Best results are
highlighted as first , second , and third . For single-agent
methods, we evaluate their performance separately on the
sequence of Agent 1, Agent 2, and the full sequence(global).
For multi-agent methods, we run the sequences of both Agent
1 and Agent 2 simultaneously. Our framework outperforms all
other single-agent and multi-agent methods, achieving state-
of-the-art performance in both single agent reconstruction and
global map reconstruction. This success is attributed to our
hybrid neural scene representation, which enables accurate and
efficient reconstruction. Additionally, the design of distributed
camera tracking with intra-to-inter loop closure and multiple
submap fusion ensures consistency across the entire map. In
Tab. III, we evaluate the two-agent rendering performance
and depth estimation results of our method and other SOTA
methods. The results demonstrate that our method achieves
high-quality rendering and accurate depth estimation. Our
proposed hybrid scene representation effectively capture both
high-frequency and low-frequency features of the environment,
enabling accurate and complete reconstruction with fine de-
tails. In Fig. 10 and Fig. 13, we present the two-agent surface
reconstruction performance on large room scenes from the
ScanNet dataset [24] and the Apartment dataset [23]. We show
the comparison of our method with single-agent methods and
multi-agent methods of the global map. The region outlined
on the image is marked in red to signify lower reconstruction
accuracy, in green to signify higher accuracy, and in yellow
to represent the groundtruth results. The experiment results
demonstrate the effectiveness of the proposed scene represen-
tation method. We show the qualitative comparison on DES
dataset of our method with the SOTA method ESLAM in Fig.
11 and Fig. 2. Our method successfully achieves consistent
completion as well as high-fidelity surface reconstruction
results in large-scale, real-world indoor scenes. We present the
four-agent scene reconstruction results in Tab. VIII, showing

<!-- page 18 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
18
Methods
Map/Frame Track/Frame Memory
Communication[MB]
Bandwidth
Visual Descriptor Network Parameter(Map)
Pose
Images
Total
Replica [23]
ESLAM [14]
0.29s
68.5ms
20.73MB
-
-
-
-
-
-
Co-SLAM [15]
0.15s
54.8ms
26.39MB
-
-
-
-
-
-
Point-SLAM [42]
10.47s
29.7ms
31.42MB
-
-
-
-
-
-
D-GNC [21]
-
-
-
2.13MB
30.15MB
0.45MB
-
32.73MB
-
CP-SLAM [22]
10.45s
34.7ms
39.75MB
1.57MB
39.75MB
0.34MB 388.46MB 430.38MB
-
MNE-SLAM [61]
0.15s
22.1ms
24.45MB
35.12MB
24.45MB
0.34MB
-
60.58MB 0.58MB/s
Ours
0.14s
22.1ms
24.73MB
0.21MB
24.73MB
0.34MB
-
25.28MB 0.25MB/s
Scannet [24]
ESLAM [14]
0.70s
0.23s
21.48MB
-
-
-
-
-
-
Co-SLAM [15]
0.20s
78.3ms
27.19MB
-
-
-
-
-
-
Point-SLAM [42]
12.69s
64.5ms
45.21MB
-
-
-
-
-
-
D-GNC [21]
-
-
-
6.37MB
38.21MB
0.85MB
-
45.43MB
-
CP-SLAM [22]
10.59s
37.4ms
53.75MB
4.21MB
65.75MB
0.73MB 395.18MB 465.06MB
-
MNE-SLAM [61]
0.21s
20.8ms
27.77MB
38.38MB
27.77MB
0.73MB
-
66.88MB 0.26MB/s
Ours
0.20s
20.8ms
27.89MB
0.57MB
27.89MB
0.73MB
-
29.19MB 0.11MB/s
TABLE XII: Runtime, Scene representation memory, and multi-robot communication performance evaluation on Replica [23]
and ScanNet [24] dataset. “Memory” refers to the storage consumption of the scene representation and the decoder.
“Communication” refers to the amount of data transmitted during the robot’s operation. “VD” denotes the visual descriptor.
“NP(map)” denotes the network parameter or the sparse point cloud map.
Fig. 16: We compared our method with current state-of-the-art traditional and neural SLAM methods: NICE-SLAM [13], Co-
SLAM [15], ESLAM [14], CP-SLAM [22] across four different datasets: Replica [23], ScanNet [24], Apartment [23], and our
own dataset. We focus on the number of optimized keyframes. Our keyframe selection approach achieves better reconstruction
results while using significantly fewer keyframes than other methods, greatly improving both system efficiency and accuracy.
that most neural SLAM methods experience significant pose
drift in real-world scenarios, ultimately leading to reconstruc-
tion failure. To better highlight the advantages of neural SLAM
methods, we visualize the rendering performance on the DES
dataset in Fig. 14, Fig. 1 and quantitative results of rendering
performance of training views and novel views in Tab. VII.
Overall, our designed hybrid representation, intra-to-inter loop
closure, and multi-submap online distillation, achieves high-
precision reconstruction and rendering performance.
Camera tracking As shown in Tab. II, we present the two-
agent camera tracking results (Agent1, Agent2) and the global
tracking performance in small room scenarios on the Replica
dataset. We present the results in terms of RMSE, Mean,
and Median. Our method achieves superior tracking accuracy
compared to other single-agent and multi-agent approaches.
In Tab. IV and Tab. VI, we provide two-agent camera track-
ing performance on Apartment dataset [23] and ScanNet
dataset [24] for larger indoor scenes. We achieve the SOTA
performance in global camera tracking. This is attributed to
our multi-agent collaborative tracking, which leverages intra-
to-inter loop closure to eliminate pose error and achieve
consistency across multiple agents. Our method outperforms
existing multi-agent and single-agent methods. In Tab. VIII,
Tab. XI, and Fig. 15, We present the performance on the DES
Methods
Reconstruction[cm]
Localization[cm]
Acc.↓Comp.↓Comp.Ratio(%)↑Mean Median RMSE
w/o tri-plane enc.
1.933
1.671
95.174
0.359
0.366
0.402
w/o hashgrid enc.
1.739
1.581
96.034
0.359
0.366
0.402
w/o coordinate enc. 1.837
1.682
95.479
0.358
0.366
0.402
w/o intra-loop.
1.831
1.592
95.779
0.397
0.403
0.432
w/o inter-loop
1.903
1.597
95.679
0.401
0.409
0.441
w/o submap
1.949
1.607
95.494
0.359
0.365
0.401
Ours
1.679
1.519
96.969
0.355
0.360
0.394
TABLE XIII: Ablation study. We conduct experiments on
Replica dataset [23] to verify the effectiveness of our method.
Our full model achieves better completion reconstructions and
more accurate pose estimation results.
dataset, showing that most neural SLAM methods experience
significant pose drift in real-world scenarios with sensor depth,
ultimately leading to reconstruction failure. Our multi-agent
approach, however, successfully achieves accurate reconstruc-
tion and pose estimation in large-scale environments.
Time analysis We analyze the speed and memory usage of
our method compared with other SOTA methods in Replica
datasets [23] and ScanNet datasets [24]. We evaluate the time
consumption of tracking and mapping every iteration and
every frame in Tab. XII. We also evaluate the memory and
communication consumption of existing methods. We provide

<!-- page 19 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
19
a detailed breakdown of the data types transmitted during
inter-robot communication. Our method transmits visual de-
scriptors, keyframe poses, and neural network parameters. In
contrast, centralized methods such as CP-SLAM also require
transmitting full keyframe images. Sparse point cloud-based
methods like Kimera-Multi [21] typically transmit sparse point
cloud maps, feature descriptors, and data for distributed pose
graph optimization. Note that Kimera-Multi requires IMU data
to run its odometry module. Therefore, in our evaluation, we
only validate the communication process and replace the orig-
inal odometry with ORB-SLAM for comparison. Compared to
CP-SLAM, our method improves communication efficiency by
seven times (7 ×) with only bandwidth-efficient information
is exchanged, including neural network parameters, keyframe
descriptors, and pose. Our distributed method significantly en-
hances communication efficiency, increasing the effectiveness
in real-world operations. In Fig. 16, we compare our method
with the current SOTA neural SLAM methods of keyframe
selection strategy. Our keyframe selection approach achieves
better reconstruction results while using significantly fewer
keyframes than other methods, greatly improving both system
efficiency and accuracy.
C. Ablation Study
In this section, we conduct various experiments to verify the
effectiveness of our method. Tab. XIII illustrates a quantitative
evaluation with different settings.
Hybrid Scene Representation We separately remove our
triplane scene representation and coordinate encoding in these
experiments. Our full model leads to higher scene recon-
struction accuracy and better completion. The triplane scene
representation is well-suited for modeling low-frequency sig-
nals with fast convergence speed, while the hashgrid net-
work excels at capturing high-frequency details. This enables
high-precision and efficient modeling of scene information.
The coordinate encoding network improves the reconstruction
completeness and enables certain levels of hole filling.
Intra-Loop Closure We remove our intra loop closure in
this experiment. Our full model leads to higher scene re-
construction accuracy and better completion. The intra loop
closure can significantly reduce the growing cumulative error
and improve the robustness and accuracy of the single-agent
camera tracking.
Inter-Loop Closure We remove the inter-loop closure in this
experiment. Inter-loop closure can effectively register differ-
ent submaps into the global map and improve the tracking
performance across different agents.
Online Distillation Submap fusion can significantly improve
the integration of information among different maps, ensuring
the consistency of the global map; otherwise, the map may
exhibit numerous discontinuities or floating artifacts. This
also suggests that handling smooth transitions between two
submaps, especially when revisiting an inactive submap, is
critical to the overall reconstruction quality.
V. CONCLUSION
In this paper, we propose a novel distributed multi-agent
neural SLAM system, MCN-SLAM, which achieves accurate
collaborative surface reconstruction and pose estimation in
both small and large-scale indoor scenes. Our distributed map-
ping and tracking framework enables our system to represent
large-scale indoor scenes under communication bandwidth
restriction. The intra-to-inter loop closure can effectively elim-
inate pose drifts and achieve global map consistency across
multiple agents. Our extensive experiments demonstrate the
effectiveness and accuracy of our system in both scene re-
construction and pose estimation. The proposed neural SLAM
dataset with high-accuracy 3D mesh and time-continuous
camera trajectory can greatly advance the development of the
community.
REFERENCES
[1] N. Hughes, Y. Chang, S. Hu, R. Talak, R. Abdulhai, J. Strader, and
L. Carlone, “Foundations of spatial perception for robotics: Hierarchical
representations and real-time systems,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, p. 02783649241229725, 2024.
[2] T. Deng, S. Liu, X. Wang, Y. Liu, D. Wang, and W. Chen, “Prosgnerf:
Progressive dynamic neural scene graph with frequency modulated auto-
encoder in urban scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09076, 2023.
[3] Z. Wu, W. Wang, Y. Yue, J. Zhang, H. Shen, and D. Wang, “Mag-MM:
Magnetic-enhanced multi-session mapping in repetitive environments,”
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, 2025.
[4] R. Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tard´os, “Orb-slam: A versatile
and accurate monocular slam system,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1147–1163, 2015.
[5] T. Qin, P. Li, and S. Shen, “Vins-mono: A robust and versatile monocular
visual-inertial state estimator,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 34,
no. 4, pp. 1004–1020, 2018.
[6] H. Shen, Q. Zong, B. Tian, and H. Lu, “Voxel-based localization
and mapping for multirobot system in gps-denied environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 69, no. 10, pp. 10 333–
10 342, 2022.
[7] R. A. Newcombe, S. J. Lovegrove, and A. J. Davison, “Dtam: Dense
tracking and mapping in real-time,” in 2011 international conference on
computer vision.
IEEE, 2011, pp. 2320–2327.
[8] T. Whelan, M. Kaess, M. Fallon, H. Johannsson, J. Leonard, and
J. McDonald, “Kintinuous: Spatially extended kinectfusion,” 2012.
[9] T. Whelan, R. F. Salas-Moreno, B. Glocker, A. J. Davison, and
S. Leutenegger, “Elasticfusion: Real-time dense slam and light source
estimation,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 35,
no. 14, pp. 1697–1716, 2016.
[10] S. Izadi, D. Kim, O. Hilliges, D. Molyneaux, R. Newcombe, P. Kohli,
J. Shotton, S. Hodges, D. Freeman, A. Davison et al., “Kinectfusion:
real-time 3d reconstruction and interaction using a moving depth cam-
era,” in Proceedings of the 24th annual ACM symposium on User
interface software and technology, 2011, pp. 559–568.
[11] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,” in ECCV, 2020.
[12] E. Sucar, S. Liu, J. Ortiz, and A. J. Davison, “imap: Implicit mapping
and positioning in real-time,” in ICCV, October 2021, pp. 6229–6238.
[13] Z. Zhu, S. Peng, V. Larsson, W. Xu, H. Bao, Z. Cui, M. R. Oswald, and
M. Pollefeys, “Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam,”
in CVPR, June 2022, pp. 12 786–12 796.
[14] M. M. Johari, C. Carta, and F. Fleuret, “Eslam: Efficient dense slam
system based on hybrid representation of signed distance fields,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 17 408–17 419.
[15] H. Wang, J. Wang, and L. Agapito, “Co-slam: Joint coordinate and
sparse parametric encodings for neural real-time slam,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2023, pp. 13 293–13 302.
[16] T. Deng, G. Shen, T. Qin, J. Wang, W. Zhao, J. Wang, D. Wang, and
W. Chen, “Plgslam: Progressive neural scene represenation with local to
global bundle adjustment,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 19 657–19 666.

<!-- page 20 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
20
[17] S. Choudhary, L. Carlone, C. Nieto, J. Rogers, H. I. Christensen,
and F. Dellaert, “Distributed mapping with privacy and communication
constraints: Lightweight algorithms and object-based models,” The Inter-
national Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 36, no. 12, pp. 1286–1311,
2017.
[18] V. Tchuiev and V. Indelman, “Distributed consistent multi-robot seman-
tic localization and mapping,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
vol. 5, no. 3, pp. 4649–4656, 2020.
[19] Y. Wang, Y. Chen, C. Cao, T. Deng, W. Zhao, J. Wang, and W. Chen,
“Salt: A flexible semi-automatic labeling tool for general lidar point
clouds with cross-scene adaptability and 4d consistency,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.23980, 2025.
[20] Y. Wang, W. Zhao, C. Cao, T. Deng, J. Wang, and W. Chen, “Sfpnet:
Sparse focal point network for semantic segmentation on general lidar
point clouds,” in European Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer,
2024, pp. 403–421.
[21] Y. Tian, Y. Chang, F. H. Arias, C. Nieto-Granda, J. P. How, and
L. Carlone, “Kimera-multi: Robust, distributed, dense metric-semantic
slam for multi-robot systems,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 38,
no. 4, 2022.
[22] J. Hu, M. Mao, H. Bao, G. Zhang, and Z. Cui, “Cp-slam: Collabora-
tive neural point-based slam system,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[23] J. Straub, T. Whelan, L. Ma, Y. Chen, E. Wijmans, S. Green, J. J. Engel,
R. Mur-Artal, C. Ren, S. Verma et al., “The replica dataset: A digital
replica of indoor spaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019.
[24] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, M. Halber, T. Funkhouser, and
M. Niessner, “Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor
scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), July 2017.
[25] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cremers, “A
benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems, 2012, pp.
573–580.
[26] C. Yeshwanth, Y.-C. Liu, M. Nießner, and A. Dai, “Scannet++: A high-
fidelity dataset of 3d indoor scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 12–22.
[27] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, “Splatam: Splat track & map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21 357–21 366.
[28] S. Wang, V. Leroy, Y. Cabon, B. Chidlovskii, and J. Revaud, “Dust3r:
Geometric 3d vision made easy,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp.
20 697–20 709.
[29] J. Wang, M. Chen, N. Karaev, A. Vedaldi, C. Rupprecht, and D. Novotny,
“Vggt: Visual geometry grounded transformer,” in Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, 2025, pp. 5294–
5306.
[30] G. Klein and D. Murray, “Parallel tracking and mapping for small ar
workspaces,” in 2007 6th IEEE and ACM International Symposium on
Mixed and Augmented Reality, 2007, pp. 225–234.
[31] R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tard´os, “Orb-slam2: An open-source slam
system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras,” IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1255–1262, 2017.
[32] C. Forster, M. Pizzoli, and D. Scaramuzza, “Svo: Fast semi-direct
monocular visual odometry,” in 2014 IEEE international conference on
robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2014, pp. 15–22.
[33] C. Zheng, W. Xu, Z. Zou, T. Hua, C. Yuan, D. He, B. Zhou, Z. Liu,
J. Lin, F. Zhu, Y. Ren, R. Wang, F. Meng, and F. Zhang, “Fast-livo2: Fast,
direct lidar–inertial–visual odometry,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 41, pp. 326–346, 2025.
[34] T. Deng, H. Xie, J. Wang, and W. Chen, “Long-term visual simultaneous
localization and mapping: Using a bayesian persistence filter-based
global map prediction,” IEEE Robotics & Automation Magazine, vol. 30,
no. 1, pp. 36–49, 2023.
[35] H. Xie, T. Deng, J. Wang, and W. Chen, “Robust incremental long-
term visual topological localization in changing environments,” IEEE
Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, vol. 72, pp. 1–14,
2022.
[36] ——, “Angular tracking consistency guided fast feature association
for visual-inertial slam,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and
Measurement, 2024.
[37] Z. Teed and J. Deng, “Droid-slam: Deep visual slam for monocular,
stereo, and rgb-d cameras,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 34, pp. 16 558–16 569, 2021.
[38] A. Rosinol, A. Violette, M. Abate, N. Hughes, Y. Chang, J. Shi,
A. Gupta, and L. Carlone, “Kimera: From slam to spatial perception
with 3d dynamic scene graphs,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 40, no. 12-14, pp. 1510–1546, 2021.
[39] Z. Teed, L. Lipson, and J. Deng, “Deep patch visual odometry,”
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 36, 2024.
[40] Y. Tang, J. Zhang, Z. Yu, H. Wang, and K. Xu, “Mips-fusion: Multi-
implicit-submaps for scalable and robust online neural rgb-d reconstruc-
tion,” ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG), vol. 42, no. 6, pp. 1–16,
2023.
[41] M. Li, J. Huang, L. Sun, A. X. Tian, T. Deng, and H. Wang, “Ngm-slam:
Gaussian splatting slam with radiance field submap,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2405.05702, 2024.
[42] E. Sandstr¨om, Y. Li, L. Van Gool, and M. R. Oswald, “Point-slam:
Dense neural point cloud-based slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 18 433–18 444.
[43] Y. Pan, X. Zhong, L. Wiesmann, T. Posewsky, J. Behley, and C. Stach-
niss, “Pin-slam: Lidar slam using a point-based implicit neural repre-
sentation for achieving global map consistency,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 4045–4064, 2024.
[44] Y. Zhang, F. Tosi, S. Mattoccia, and M. Poggi, “Go-slam: Global
optimization for consistent 3d instant reconstruction,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023,
pp. 3727–3737.
[45] L. Liso, E. Sandstr¨om, V. Yugay, L. Van Gool, and M. R. Oswald,
“Loopy-slam: Dense neural slam with loop closures,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 20 363–20 373.
[46] T. Deng, Y. Wang, H. Xie, H. Wang, R. Guo, J. Wang, D. Wang, and
W. Chen, “Neslam: Neural implicit mapping and self-supervised feature
tracking with depth completion and denoising,” IEEE Transactions on
Automation Science and Engineering, vol. 22, pp. 12 309–12 321, 2025.
[47] M. Li, Z. Guo, T. Deng, Y. Zhou, Y. Ren, and H. Wang, “Ddn-slam:
Real time dense dynamic neural implicit slam,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 2025.
[48] S. Zhu, G. Wang, H. Blum, J. Liu, L. Song, M. Pollefeys, and
H. Wang, “Sni-slam: Semantic neural implicit slam,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 21 167–21 177.
[49] T. Deng, Y. Chen, L. Zhang, J. Yang, S. Yuan, D. Wang, and W. Chen,
“Compact 3d gaussian splatting for dense visual slam,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2403.11247, 2024.
[50] M. Li, S. Liu, H. Zhou, G. Zhu, N. Cheng, T. Deng, and H. Wang, “Sgs-
slam: Semantic gaussian splatting for neural dense slam,” in European
Conference on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2025, pp. 163–179.
[51] S. Liu, T. Deng, H. Zhou, L. Li, H. Wang, D. Wang, and M. Li, “Mg-
slam: Structure gaussian splatting slam with manhattan world hypothe-
sis,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science and Engineering, 2025.
[52] L. Zhu, Y. Li, E. Sandstr¨om, S. Huang, K. Schindler, and I. Armeni,
“Loopsplat: Loop closure by registering 3d gaussian splats,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2408.10154, 2024.
[53] T. Deng, W. Wu, J. He, Y. Pan, X. Jiang, S. Yuan, D. Wang, H. Wang,
and W. Chen, “Vpgs-slam: Voxel-based progressive 3d gaussian slam in
large-scale scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2505.18992, 2025.
[54] M. Karrer, P. Schmuck, and M. Chli, “Cvi-slam—collaborative visual-
inertial slam,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 4, pp.
2762–2769, 2018.
[55] D. Zou and P. Tan, “Coslam: Collaborative visual slam in dynamic
environments,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine
intelligence, vol. 35, no. 2, pp. 354–366, 2012.
[56] P. Schmuck and M. Chli, “Ccm-slam: Robust and efficient centralized
collaborative monocular simultaneous localization and mapping for
robotic teams,” Journal of Field Robotics, vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 763–781,
2019.
[57] P.-Y. Lajoie, B. Ramtoula, Y. Chang, L. Carlone, and G. Beltrame,
“Door-slam: Distributed, online, and outlier resilient slam for robotic
teams,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 1656–
1663, 2020.
[58] P.-Y. Lajoie and G. Beltrame, “Swarm-slam: Sparse decentralized col-
laborative simultaneous localization and mapping framework for multi-
robot systems,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 1,
pp. 475–482, 2023.
[59] H. Xu, P. Liu, X. Chen, and S. Shen, “d2slam: Decentralized and
distributed collaborative visual-inertial slam system for aerial swarm,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 3445–3464, 2024.

<!-- page 21 -->
IEEE TRANSACTIONS ON PATTERN ANALYSIS AND MACHINE INTELLIGENCE
21
[60] Y. Deng, Y. Tang, Y. Yang, D. Wang, and Y. Yue, “Macim: Multi-agent
collaborative implicit mapping,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
2024.
[61] T. Deng, G. Shen, C. Xun, S. Yuan, T. Jin, H. Shen, Y. Wang, J. Wang,
H. Wang, D. Wang et al., “Mne-slam: Multi-agent neural slam for mobile
robots,” in Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, 2025, pp. 1485–1494.
[62] Z. Teed and J. Deng, “Raft: Recurrent all-pairs field transforms for opti-
cal flow,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European Conference,
Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part II 16.
Springer,
2020, pp. 402–419.
[63] A. Knapitsch, J. Park, Q.-Y. Zhou, and V. Koltun, “Tanks and temples:
Benchmarking large-scale scene reconstruction,” ACM Transactions on
Graphics (ToG), vol. 36, no. 4, pp. 1–13, 2017.
[64] T. Zhou, R. Tucker, J. Flynn, G. Fyffe, and N. Snavely, “Stereo
magnification: learning view synthesis using multiplane images,”
ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 37, no. 4, Jul. 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3197517.3201323
[65] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, R. Ortiz-Cayon, N. K. Kalantari, R. Ra-
mamoorthi, R. Ng, and A. Kar, “Local light field fusion: Practical view
synthesis with prescriptive sampling guidelines,” ACM Transactions on
Graphics (ToG), vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2019.
[66] A. Liu, R. Tucker, V. Jampani, A. Makadia, N. Snavely, and
A. Kanazawa, “Infinite nature: Perpetual view generation of natural
scenes from a single image,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Inter-
national Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 14 458–14 467.
[67] J. T. Barron, B. Mildenhall, D. Verbin, P. P. Srinivasan, and P. Hedman,
“Mip-nerf 360: Unbounded anti-aliased neural radiance fields,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2022, pp. 5470–5479.
[68] A. Meuleman, Y.-L. Liu, C. Gao, J.-B. Huang, C. Kim, M. H. Kim, and
J. Kopf, “Progressively optimized local radiance fields for robust view
synthesis,” in CVPR, 2023.
[69] A. S. Huang, M. Antone, E. Olson, L. Fletcher, D. Moore, S. Teller, and
J. Leonard, “A high-rate, heterogeneous data set from the darpa urban
challenge,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 29,
no. 13, pp. 1595–1601, 2010.
[70] K. Y. Leung, Y. Halpern, T. D. Barfoot, and H. H. Liu, “The utias multi-
robot cooperative localization and mapping dataset,” The International
Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 30, no. 8, pp. 969–974, 2011.
[71] S. Agarwal, A. Vora, G. Pandey, W. Williams, H. Kourous, and
J. McBride, “Ford multi-av seasonal dataset,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, vol. 39, no. 12, pp. 1367–1376, 2020.
[72] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics:
The kitti dataset,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237, 2013.
[73] N. Carlevaris-Bianco, A. K. Ushani, and R. M. Eustice, “University
of michigan north campus long-term vision and lidar dataset,” The
International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 35, no. 9, pp. 1023–
1035, 2016.
[74] A. X. Chang, T. Funkhouser, L. Guibas, P. Hanrahan, Q. Huang, Z. Li,
S. Savarese, M. Savva, S. Song, H. Su et al., “Shapenet: An information-
rich 3d model repository,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1512.03012, 2015.
[75] M. Burri, J. Nikolic, P. Gohl, T. Schneider, J. Rehder, S. Omari, M. W.
Achtelik, and R. Siegwart, “The euroc micro aerial vehicle datasets,”
The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 35, no. 10, pp.
1157–1163, 2016.
[76] W. Maddern, G. Pascoe, C. Linegar, and P. Newman, “1 year, 1000
km: The oxford robotcar dataset,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 36, no. 1, pp. 3–15, 2017.
[77] H. Caesar, V. Bankiti, A. H. Lang, S. Vora, V. E. Liong, Q. Xu,
A. Krishnan, Y. Pan, G. Baldan, and O. Beijbom, “nuscenes: A
multimodal dataset for autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020,
pp. 11 621–11 631.
[78] P. Sun, H. Kretzschmar, X. Dotiwalla, A. Chouard, V. Patnaik, P. Tsui,
J. Guo, Y. Zhou, Y. Chai, B. Caine et al., “Scalability in perception
for autonomous driving: Waymo open dataset,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2020,
pp. 2446–2454.
[79] D. Zuniga-No¨el, A. Jaenal, R. Gomez-Ojeda, and J. Gonzalez-Jimenez,
“The uma-vi dataset: Visual–inertial odometry in low-textured and dy-
namic illumination environments,” The International Journal of Robotics
Research, vol. 39, no. 9, pp. 1052–1060, 2020.
[80] W. Wang, D. Zhu, X. Wang, Y. Hu, Y. Qiu, C. Wang, Y. Hu, A. Kapoor,
and S. Scherer, “Tartanair: A dataset to push the limits of visual slam,”
in 2020 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 4909–4916.
[81] T.-M. Nguyen, S. Yuan, M. Cao, Y. Lyu, T. H. Nguyen, and L. Xie,
“Ntu viral: A visual-inertial-ranging-lidar dataset, from an aerial vehicle
viewpoint,” The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 41,
no. 3, pp. 270–280, 2022.
[82] C. Yeshwanth, Y.-C. Liu, M. Nießner, and A. Dai, “Scannet++: A high-
fidelity dataset of 3d indoor scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 12–22.
[83] S. Zhao, Y. Gao, T. Wu, D. Singh, R. Jiang, H. Sun, M. Sarawata, Y. Qiu,
W. Whittaker, I. Higgins, Y. Du, S. Su, C. Xu, J. Keller, J. Karhade,
L. Nogueira, S. Saha, J. Zhang, W. Wang, C. Wang, and S. Scherer,
“Subt-mrs dataset: Pushing slam towards all-weather environments,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2024, pp. 22 647–22 657.
[84] T.-M. Nguyen, S. Yuan, T. H. Nguyen, P. Yin, H. Cao, L. Xie,
M. Wozniak, P. Jensfelt, M. Thiel, J. Ziegenbein et al., “Mcd: Diverse
large-scale multi-campus dataset for robot perception,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 22 304–22 313.
[85] H. Li, Y. Zou, N. Chen, J. Lin, X. Liu, W. Xu, C. Zheng, R. Li, D. He,
F. Kong et al., “Mars-lvig dataset: A multi-sensor aerial robots slam
dataset for lidar-visual-inertial-gnss fusion,” The International Journal
of Robotics Research, p. 02783649241227968, 2024.
[86] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodr´ıguez, J. M. Montiel, and J. D.
Tard´os, “Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–
inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37,
no. 6, pp. 1874–1890, 2021.
[87] R. Arandjelovic, P. Gronat, A. Torii, T. Pajdla, and J. Sivic, “Netvlad:
Cnn architecture for weakly supervised place recognition,” in Proceed-
ings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2016, pp. 5297–5307.
[88] D. Azinovi´c, R. Martin-Brualla, D. B. Goldman, M. Nießner, and
J. Thies, “Neural rgb-d surface reconstruction,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), June 2022, pp. 6290–6301.
[89] J. Wang, T. Bleja, and L. Agapito, “Go-surf: Neural feature grid
optimization for fast, high-fidelity rgb-d surface reconstruction,” in 2022
International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2022, pp. 433–442.
[90] T. Schops, T. Sattler, and M. Pollefeys, “Bad slam: Bundle adjusted
direct rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2019.
[91] A. Dai, M. Nießner, M. Zollh¨ofer, S. Izadi, and C. Theobalt,
“Bundlefusion: Real-time globally consistent 3d reconstruction using
on-the-fly surface reintegration,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 36, no. 4,
jul 2017. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3072959.3054739
[92] J. Huang, S.-S. Huang, H. Song, and S.-M. Hu, “Di-fusion: Online
implicit 3d reconstruction with deep priors,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2021, pp. 8932–8941.
[93] X. Yang, H. Li, H. Zhai, Y. Ming, Y. Liu, and G. Zhang, “Vox-
fusion: Dense tracking and mapping with voxel-based neural implicit
representation,” in 2022 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
Augmented Reality (ISMAR), 2022, pp. 499–507.
[94] H. Huang, L. Li, H. Cheng, and S.-K. Yeung, “Photo-slam: Real-
time simultaneous localization and photorealistic mapping for monocular
stereo and rgb-d cameras,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2024, pp.
21 584–21 593.
[95] D. P. Kingma and J. Ba, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
in ICLR, 2015.
[96] W. E. Lorensen and H. E. Cline, “Marching cubes: A high resolution 3d
surface construction algorithm,” in Seminal graphics: pioneering efforts
that shaped the field, 1998, pp. 347–353.
[97] H. Shen, Z. Wu, W. Wang, Q. Lyu, H. Zhou, T. Deng, Y. Zhu, and
D. Wang, “Cte-mlo: Continuous-time and efficient multi-lidar odom-
etry with localizability-aware point cloud sampling,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2408.04901, 2024.
