<!-- page 1 -->
Gaussian Mapping for Evolving Scenes
Vladimir Yugay1*, Thies Kersten1∗, Luca Carlone3, Theo Gevers1, Martin R. Oswald1, Lukas Schmid2,3
1University of Amsterdam
2University of Technology Nuremberg
3Massachusetts Institute of Technology
vladimiryugay.github.io/game
Figure 1. GaME is a dense mapping method capable of novel view synthesis. Given a single-camera posed RGBD input stream of
an evolving environment, i.e., structural changes happening outside of the camera view but during data capture, GaME reconstructs a
consistent up-to-date 3D Gaussian map that can be rendered from previously unseen viewpoints. We showcase the high-fidelity 3D
Gaussian map of a real-world environment, where our method effectively detects changes and accurately integrates them into the map. Our
model accurately renders fine-grained objects that were moved during the recording, highlighted in blue, yellow, and purple.
Abstract
Mapping systems with novel view synthesis (NVS) capa-
bilities, most notably 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), are
widely used in computer vision, as well as in various ap-
plications, including augmented reality, robotics, and au-
tonomous driving. However, many current approaches are
limited to static scenes. While recent works have begun ad-
dressing short-term dynamics (motion within the camera’s
view), long-term dynamics (the scene evolving through
changes out of view) remain less explored. To overcome
this limitation, we introduce a dynamic scene adaptation
mechanism to continuously update 3DGS to reflect the lat-
est changes. Since maintaining consistency remains chal-
lenging due to stale observations disrupting the reconstruc-
tion process, we further propose a novel keyframe man-
agement mechanism that discards outdated observations
while preserving as much information as possible. We thor-
oughly evaluate Gaussian Mapping for Evolving Scenes
(GaME) on both synthetic and real-world datasets, achiev-
ing a 29.7% improvement in PSNR and a 3×-improvement
in L1 depth error over the most competitive baseline.
1. Introduction
Visual mapping reconstructs a consistent 3D representation
of an environment from monocular or multi-view imagery.
It is foundational for perception and decision-making in au-
tonomous driving, mobile robotics, and AR/VR, where spa-
tial understanding is required for navigation, planning, and
interaction. Recent advances in visual dense reconstruc-
tion [20, 25, 28], have improved robustness and accuracy in
complex, real-world scenes. Nevertheless, significant chal-
lenges persist in handling changing environments.
Recent mapping systems have been enhanced with novel
view synthesis (NVS) capabilities [11, 18], enabling them
to render realistic views of scenes, allowing for detailed
scene exploration and the creation of high-quality virtual
environments. These approaches typically assume that the
scene is static, such that optimization over multiple frames
is well-conditioned. However, real-world environments are
predominantly dynamic and include both short-term dy-
namic effects (i.e., things moving within view of the cam-
era) as well as long-term dynamics (i.e., the scene evolv-
ing through changes outside the view of the camera; for
a detailed definition see [29]).
While some of the most
recent NVS approaches address short-term dynamic ob-
arXiv:2506.06909v3  [cs.CV]  27 Mar 2026

<!-- page 2 -->
jects [36, 42], long-term dynamics remain less explored. As
a result, modern reconstruction methods with NVS capabil-
ities struggle to capture changes as the scene evolves during
data capture but outside the camera view, resulting in cor-
rupted and erroneous reconstruction.
During dense mapping of long-term dynamic scenes,
systems must continuously update the 3D representation
to capture the scene’s evolution and maintain reliable op-
eration. This is especially challenging compared to clas-
sical multi-session mapping, as changes can occur at any
time during data collection. Recently, initial methods have
started to address this challenge. A first approach is pre-
sented in Panoptic Multi-TSDFs [27], which builds seman-
tically consistent submaps and reasons about changes at the
submap level. The following works [6, 22, 28] similarly
focus on object-level mapping to handle evolving scenes.
However, all these methods rely on map representations that
cannot easily be re-rendered, preventing their use in AR/VR
or digital maps where realistic rendering is essential.
This work addresses the challenge of NVS mapping us-
ing 3DGS in evolving, long-term dynamic scenes. The key
insight of our method is that two main problems prevent
successful 3DGS mapping in changing environments: an
outdated map and stale observations. We address these lim-
itations by introducing a dynamic scene adaptation (DSA)
mechanism that detects changes and integrates them into
the 3DGS map, as well as a keyframe management system
that removes stale observations while minimizing the loss
of information. We make the following contributions:
• We present GaME, the first NVS-capable mapping sys-
tem addressing evolving, long-term dynamic scenes.
• A Dynamic Scene Adaptation (DSA) mechanism to in-
crementally update a 3DGS model.
• An efficient keyframe management strategy for accurate
3D reconstruction through long-term scene changes.
• We thoroughly evaluate GaME on synthetic and real-
world data, showing a performance increase of 325% in
depth and 29% in color rendering over the most competi-
tive baselines. We release the code open-source.
2. Related Work
3D Change Detection. The goal of change detection is to
handle long-term dynamic effects, i.e., changes to the scene
occurring outside the view of the sensor. Typically, this is
addressed in a multi-session setting. Once a map for each
session is constructed, changes can be identified through
scene differencing [1, 5, 13, 26].
To achieve an object-
level change understanding, this has been extended using
semantic information [15], where recent trends focus on
the extraction of more specialized object features, includ-
ing learned shape descriptors [7, 26, 32], neural object rep-
resentations [6, 43], and language embeddings [24]. Most
related to us, Lu et al. [16] recently presented a 3D Gaussian
Splatting-based [12] approach by re-rendering the scene to
newly collected views and using EfficientSAM [35] for 2D
change detection. However, the assumption that the scene
does not change during each session and offline processing
is highly limiting, as changes in evolving scenes can occur
at any time during the mapping process. In contrast, our
approach is designed to operate online and does not impose
any limitations on when the scene changes.
Online Reconstruction of Evolving Scenes.
Recently,
methods addressing the modeling of evolving scenes in
an online fashion have emerged. A first approach is pre-
sented by Schmid et al. [27], which generates local seman-
tically consistent submaps and incrementally reasons about
changes at the submap level. Fu et al. [6] proposes neu-
ral object descriptors to build an object-level pose graph
and detect changes in the graph configuration. This has
recently been extended with SE(3)-equivariant descrip-
tors [8]. Qian et al. [22] present a frame-to-map-tracking
approach, using a probabilistic update rule to detect object-
level changes, which is further extended to a variational
factor-graph approach in [23]. A unified short- and long-
term dynamic reconstruction formulation is presented in
Khronos [28], where objects are reconstructed locally and
changes detected using a library of rays. Nonetheless, these
methods rely on map representations that do not support re-
alistic rendering. In contrast, GaME provides scene recon-
struction capable of real-time color and depth rendering.
Dynamic Gaussian Splatting. 3D Gaussian Splatting [12]
has revolutionized novel view synthesis (NVS) by enabling
photorealistic, real-time rendering at over 100 FPS. Com-
pared to neural radiance fields [19], 3DGS is significantly
more memory-efficient and faster to optimize. The prob-
lem of dynamic or 4D GS has attracted broad interest. A
series of works [3, 17, 34, 38] optimize a canonical set of
Gaussians from the initial frame and model temporal varia-
tions through a deformation field. However, these methods
are limited to short video sequences, as they cannot intro-
duce new Gaussians after the initial frame. Another class
of approaches [4, 10, 39] directly models temporal Gaus-
sians that can exist over subsets of frames. Despite their
improved flexibility, these methods still require offline op-
timization and multi-view input, which makes scalability a
significant bottleneck for high-quality dynamic reconstruc-
tion. In contrast, our mapping operates online using only a
single RGB-D camera.
Online Gaussian Mapping. Most related to us, 3D Gaus-
sian Splatting has sparked a wave of online RGB-D map-
ping methods [9, 11, 18, 37, 40] that adopt 3D Gaussians
as their primary scene representation. While these methods
perform well in static scenes, they struggle in dynamic en-
vironments. More recent approaches [36, 42] tackle short-
term dynamics within the camera’s view by incorporating
segmentation models to suppress transient objects, such as

<!-- page 3 -->
humans or small moving elements. However, they remain
limited in addressing long-term scene changes, as stale ob-
servations corrupt the optimization process.
In contrast,
GaME is designed to robustly handle evolving environ-
ments by filtering outdated information and maintaining
high rendering quality throughout reconstruction.
3. Background: 3D Gaussian Splatting
3D Gaussian splatting (3DGS) [12] is an effective method
for representing 3D scenes with novel-view synthesis ca-
pability. This approach is notable for its speed, without
compromising the rendering quality. In Kerbl et al. [12],
3D Gaussians are initialized from sparse Structure-from-
Motion points and are further optimized using differentiable
rendering from multiple views. Each Gaussian is parame-
terized by mean µ ∈R3, covariance Σ ∈R3×3, opacity
o ∈R, and RGB color C ∈R3. The mean of a projected
(splatted) 3D Gaussian in the 2D image plane µI is com-
puted as follows:
  \ m
u
 ^{I} = \pi \big (
P
(T_{wc} \mu _\text {homogeneous} )\big ) \enspace , 
(1)
where Twc ∈SE(3) is the world-to-camera transformation,
P ∈R4×4 is an OpenGL-style projection matrix, π : R4 →
R2 is a projection to pixel coordinates. The 2D covariance
ΣI of a splatted Gaussian is:
  \ Sigma ^
{I} = J R_{wc} \Sigma R_{wc}^T J^T \enspace , 
(2)
where J ∈R2×3 is an affine transformation from Zwicker
et al. [44], Rwc ∈SO(3) is the rotation component of
world-to-camera transformation Twc. We refer to Zwicker
et al. [44] for further details about the projection matrices.
The color C along one channel ch at a pixel i is influenced
by m ordered Gaussians an rendered as:
  C
^
{
c
h}_
{i}
 &=
 
\su
m _ {j \
le m}
 C ^ {c h}_{j
}\ , \
a lp
h a _
{ j} \prod _{k < j} (1 - \alpha _{k}), \nonumber \\ \text {where}\quad \alpha _{j} &= o_{j}\,e^{-\sigma _{j}}, \qquad \sigma _{j} = \tfrac {1}{2}\,\Delta _{j}^\top \Sigma _{j}^{-1}\Delta _{j}. \label {eq:color_blending}
(3)
where ∆j ∈R2 is the offset between the pixel coordi-
nates and the 2D mean of a splatted Gaussian. The parame-
ters of the 3D Gaussians are iteratively optimized by mini-
mizing the photometric loss between rendered and training
images. During optimization, C is encoded with spherical
harmonics SH ∈R15 to account for direction-based color
variations. Covariance is decomposed as Σ = RSST RT ,
where R ∈SE(3) and S = diag(s) ∈R3×3 are rotation
and scale, respectively, to preserve the covariance positive
semi-definite property during gradient-based optimization.
4. Method
GaME builds and maintains a 3D map capable of novel
view synthesis of a static environment undergoing structural
changes happening outside the sensor’s view at any time.
Our method processes posed depth and color images from
a single monocular RGB-D sensor.
For each keyframe,
GaME triggers the Dynamic Scene Adaptation (DSA) mod-
ule to incorporate changed, removed, or added geometry in
the global map. Simultaneously, the keyframe management
system updates the observations to ensure they reflect the
scene’s up-to-date state and do not disrupt the optimization
process. An overview of our approach is shown in Fig. 2.
4.1. Online Mapping
The primary goal of our method is to create a 3DGS map
that is consistent with the most recent observations. Un-
like previous work [27] operating on the point clouds, we
chose not to model objects as separate entities, as this is
prohibitively expensive in a 3DGS setup. Moreover, accu-
rately optimizing individual objects represented as 3DGS
is hard due to the nature of the splatting mechanism (3),
which inherently correlates all Gaussians. Instead, we pro-
pose to build a singular representation consisting of a set
of 3D Gaussians {Gi}N
i=1 and extract changed geometry
on an ‘as needed’ basis during Dynamic Scene Adaptation
(Sec. 4.2). During online mapping, we optimize the 3DGS
parameters of the scene using a set of keyframes for super-
vision, minimizing the loss:
  L = L_\tex t { color}( \ha t {I}, I) + L_\text {depth}(\hat {D}, D), \label {eq:joint_loss}
(4)
where I is the original image, ˆI is the rendered image, D
and ˆD are the measured and reconstructed depth maps. The
color loss and depth losses are defined as:
  L_\text {c o lo r }( \
h
a
t
 {I}, I )  &= 
(1
 -
 
\ l ambda )\ , 
\
frac {1}{K} \sum _{p} \big | \hat {I}(p) - I(p) \big | \nonumber \\ &\quad +\, \lambda \,\big (1 - \mathrm {SSIM}(\hat {I}, I)\big ), \label {eq:color_loss}
(5)
  L_\te xt {d e p
t
h
}
( \hat { D}, D) = \frac {1}{K} \sum _{p} |\hat {D}(p) - D(p)|, \label {eq:depth_loss}
(6)
where K is the number of rendered pixels in the rendered
image or depth map, p ∈Z2 denotes the pixel coordinates,
and SSIM is a structure similarity loss [33], and λ ∈[0, 1] is
the weight balancing the L1 and SSIM terms. We addition-
ally include an isotropic regularization term [40] to prevent
degenerate Gaussian shapes.
4.2. Dynamic Scene Adaptation
In addition to reconstructing newly explored regions of the
scenes, GaME addresses three potential scenarios: the addi-
tion, movement, or removal of rigid geometry outside of the
camera view. While GaME can be readily combined with
object re-localization techniques [8, 26, 32], object tracking

<!-- page 4 -->
Figure 2. GaME Architecture. Given a segmented RGB-D input stream, the keyframe management system selects keyframes and triggers
the dynamic scene adaptation (DSA) module. DSA first integrates newly observed geometry, then removes outdated geometry using
covisible keyframes from the 3D Gaussian Splatting map. The keyframe manager then masks stale regions, and the mapping system uses
the processed keyframes for local covisibility window optimization.
does not affect NVS, and the problem can thus be simplified
into two core operations: Add and Remove.
Add. As the first step, DSA utilizes the current observations
to detect changes in the scene where new geometry has been
added. They are defined as already reconstructed Gaussians
where the observed depth is closer to the camera than the
rendered depth from the model:
  \m a
t
hc
al {G}_ \ text {ad d
} &= \ Big \ {\, \m
a
thbf {G}_i \,\Big |\, \alpha (\mathbf {p}) \geq \epsilon _\text {opacity} \,\wedge \nonumber \\ &\qquad \hat {D}(\mathbf {p}) > D(\mathbf {p}) + \epsilon _{\text {depth}} \,\Big \}, \label {eq:add}
(7)
where α(p) represents rendered opacity at pixel p ∈Z2,
ϵopacity, ϵdepth ∈R are the thresholds accounting for the ren-
dering noise.
On the next step, DSA dynamically seeds new Gaussian
primitives in newly explored regions to reconstruct the com-
plete scene. Following [40], such regions Rnew are charac-
terized by low opacity, a large rendered depth overshoot, or
high color error:
  \m a
t
h c al  {R }_\t e xt {new}  
&= \B i g \{ \ ,  \mathbf {p} \i n
 \mathbb { Z}^2 
\
,\Big |\, \alpha (\mathbf {p}) < \epsilon _\text {opacity} \,\vee \nonumber \\ &\qquad \hat {D}(\mathbf {p}) - D(\mathbf {p}) > \tau \cdot \mathrm {median}(L_\text {depth}) \,\vee \nonumber \\ &\qquad L_\text {color}(\mathbf {p}) > \epsilon _\text {seed} \,\Big \}. \label {eq:new}
(8)
where Ldepth(p) = | ˆD(p)−D(p)| and Lcolor(p) = |ˆI(p)−
I(p)| denote the per-pixel depth and color errors, and τ ∈
R>0, ϵseed ∈R are thresholds. The method lifts the in-
put RGB-D frame in Rnew into 3D space and uses it as the
means for new Gaussians. After that, the new Gaussians are
optimized against the current keyframe for a small number
of iterations (see Sec. 4.1) before the Remove step.
Remove. On the next step, DSA detects stale Gaussians that
need to be removed from the scene representation. Specif-
ically, changed parts of the 3DGS model can be identified
as those with high opacity, but disagreeing visually or geo-
metrically with the new observations:
  \begi n
 
{a
lig ned}  \mathcal  
{G}_\text  {remov e } &= \ Big \ {\, \m
athbf {G}_i \,\Big |\, \alpha (\mathbf {p}) \geq \epsilon _\text {opacity} \,\wedge \\ &\quad L_\text {color}(\mathbf {p}) > \epsilon _\text {color} \,\wedge \, \hat {D}(\mathbf {p}) < D(\mathbf {p}) - \epsilon _\text {depth} \,\Big \} \end {aligned} \label {eq:gremove} 
(9)
where ϵcolor ∈R accounts for color rendering noise. There
are two notable changes compared to the Add condition.
First, the sign of the depth criterion is inverted, reflecting
areas where the rays of the observation would penetrate into
the current model, thus indicating that the model geometry
can no longer be present. This also avoids spurious detec-
tions where objects are simply occluded rather than absent.
Second, we leverage the high visual fidelity of 3DGS as an-
other conflict signal by adding a color term. In contrast to
most long-term mapping methods, which rely solely on 3D
information [5, 13, 23, 26–28], this allows GaME to also
detect changes that are not geometrically significant, such
as a picture removed from the wall.
Naively removing the Gremove breaks the consistency of
the scene. Specifically, when only parts of the objects that
need to be removed are seen in the current frame. To address
this, DSA renders Gremove to each covisible keyframe KF
and verifies whether the color and depth are consistent with
the model:
  \
mathca l
 
{ R }_ \te xt {remov e }^\text
 {KF} &= \ Big \{\ , \m a thbf {p}
 
\in \mathbb {Z}^2 \,\Big |\, L_\text {color}(\mathbf {p}) < \epsilon _\text {color}, \nonumber \\ &\qquad L_\text {depth}(\mathbf {p}) < \epsilon _\text {depth},\; \alpha (\mathbf {p}) \geq \epsilon _\text {opacity} \,\Big \}. \label {eq:rrm_kf}
(10)

<!-- page 5 -->
Input Image
Rendered Scene
Previous Keyframe
Object Disappears
Object Appears
Figure 3. Illustration of Add and Remove operations. The input disagrees with the rendered model (red). For disappearance (top), the
conflicting region is projected to previous keyframes for removal (red), where complete object consistency is enforced through the object
mask (blue). This allows GaME to extract complete objects even under partial observations and occlusion. When a new object appears on
the scene (bottom), new Gaussians are added (red) and the area of the new object is marked as stale in previous keyframes to prevent the
contamination of the optimization process.
RKF
remove highlights the areas of previous keyframes where
they observe the Gaussians that are removed. However, the
detected conflicting areas might not accurately cover the ob-
jects due to occlusions and sensing noise. To address this,
DSA uses dense SAM [14] masks of the keyframes, and
selects all masks that are intersecting with the rendering
of Gremove. Then the selected masks are used to segment
the Gaussians that additionally need to be removed GKF
remove.
Our method uses FlashSplat [30] to optimally assign masks
to the Gaussians, providing multiview consistency making
our method robust to the noisy depth and color renderings.
Notably, SAM masks may overlap and carry no semantic la-
bels; their sole purpose is to delineate the complete silhou-
ette of object that needs to be removed. This allows DSA to
remove whole objects, even when only parts of them were
visible in a current frame.
Finally, the joint set, Gremove ∪S
KF GKF
remove, is removed
from the global Gaussian model, and all the Gaussians are
optimized for a small number of iterations to integrate the
changes. The DSA process is illustrated in Fig. 3.
4.3. Keyframe Management
Since jointly optimizing Gaussians using all frames from
a video stream is computationally infeasible, we maintain
a smaller set of keyframes Wk. Effective keyframe man-
agement (KM) aims to select non-redundant keyframes that
observe the same region while spanning a wide baseline to
enforce stronger multiview constraints. Following [11, 40],
keyframes are selected every time a frame exceeds a trans-
lation θtranslation ∈R or a rotation θrotation ∈R threshold.
Covisibility. Upon triggering Add or Remove operations
by DSA, all covisible keyframes are retrieved by reproject-
ing 3D points from the current frame and selecting frames
where these points are not occluded. This approach dif-
fers from conventional 3DGS methods [18, 36], which de-
termine covisibility based on the number of Gaussians used
to re-render the keyframes. We found projection to be more
reliable than re-rendering in multi-room environments, as
Gaussians from different rooms may appear visible due to
alpha blending, leading to erroneous covisibility estimates.
Keyframe Masking. In evolving scenes, excluding out-
dated visual information plays a critical role, as the scene
may change over time, making previous observations detri-
mental for the 3DGS optimization process. However, dis-
carding entire keyframes that observe stale geometry can
result in losing useful information. While some parts of the
scene may change, other regions often remain stable and
can provide valuable signals for 3DGS optimization. There-
fore, rather than discarding entire keyframes as stale, GaME

<!-- page 6 -->
selectively ignores only the stale areas within them.
To achieve this, before seeding new Gaussians in Rnew
or removing Gremove and GKF
remove, our keyframe management
system renders them onto covisible keyframes and assesses
conflicts via photometric and geometric losses Eq. (4).
High-error regions correspond to areas of the map that were
changed but are not reflected in the observations. To mit-
igate rendering noise [12], these regions are refined into
object-aligned areas before being marked as ignored: for
Remove, using precomputed SAM [14] masks that inter-
sect the conflict region; for Add, via morphological closing
of the reprojected depth conflict. During optimization, all
keyframes with any SAM mask that is sufficiently covered
by the erroneous area are ignored. For the rest, GaME opti-
mizes the losses from Eq. (4) using the masked version of
losses. We visualize the keyframes with masked out stale
areas on Fig. 4.
Figure 4. Visualizations of the outdated keyframes. After de-
tecting the changes, our keyframe management masks out the ar-
eas of covisible keyframes observing changed geometry.
5. Experiments
Datasets.
We test our method on the Flat [27] dataset,
which consists of two RGB-D sequences captured in a syn-
thetic environment with significant changes occurring be-
tween. We further evaluate on the Aria [21] dataset to as-
sess performance on real-world data. We select two record-
ings from two rooms each that have undergone long-term
changes. Finally, the TUM-RGBD [31] dataset is used to
assess performance on three different static scenes follow-
ing the protocol of [18].
Evaluation Metrics. To assess rendering quality, we com-
pute PSNR, SSIM [33] and LPIPS [41]. Rendering metrics
on all the datasets are evaluated by rendering full-resolution
images along the ground-truth trajectory.
We assess the
depth error using the L1 norm in centimeters. In the ta-
bles, results are color-coded to indicate ranking:
best ,
second-best , and third-best .
Baselines.
We compare GaME with state-of-the-art
3DGS online reconstruction systems MonoGS [18] and
SplaTAM [11]. We compare to DG-SLAM [16], a recent
dynamic 3DGS method, to assess the ability of dynamic
Methods
PSNR [dB] ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 [cm] ↓
SplaTAM [11]
15.88 / 12.69
0.48 / 0.30
0.55 / 0.70
21.16 / 59.91
MonoGS [18]
21.24 / 21.33
0.77 / 0.77
0.40 / 0.40
30.95 / 29.91
DG-SLAM [16]
13.72 / 13.70
0.59 / 0.60
0.74 / 0.74
73.76 / 73.90
GaME (Ours)
24.55 / 24.26
0.93 / 0.93
0.14 / 0.14
6.9 / 7.9
Table 1.
Rendering performance on the Flat dataset.
Our
method significantly outperforms other baselines thanks to dy-
namic scene adaptation and keyframe management system. Met-
rics are reported for input / novel views.
3DGS SLAM to handle evolving scenes. Wild-GS [42] can-
not be run with ground-truth poses, as it relies on an off-the-
shelf depth estimator that may be inconsistent with them.
At the same time, it fails to track the camera poses on the
Aria and Flat datasets. For this reason, we were not able to
compare our method with it.
Evolving Scene Evaluation Protocol. The goal of map-
ping evolving scenes is to render only the most up-to-date
reconstruction without prior information on when the scene
was changed.
In addition, the system should be able to
accurately render both the views it observed (input views)
and unobserved frames (novel views). To achieve this, we
merge RGB-D captures from every scene in the Aria and
Flat datasets into a single continuous sequence to recreate
this real-world behavior. For rendering evaluation, every
10th frame from each scene’s last RGB-D sequence is held
out for novel view synthesis testing. The remaining 90% of
frames are used to evaluate input view synthesis. To isolate
the mapping performance, ground-truth poses are used for
GaME and all baselines.
5.1. Evolving Scene Mapping Results
We run GaME on the Flat and Aria datasets to evaluate ren-
dering quality in evolving scenes, shown in Tabs. 1 and 2.
The Flat dataset is designed to test mapping under scene
changes and includes more substantial long-term dynam-
ics. We note that all losses are computed over complete
images, where changed areas typically occupy a smaller
part. Nonetheless, we observe notable differences in ren-
dering performance on both datasets, where GaME is the
only method that accurately adapts the reconstruction to
even subtle scene changes without compromising render-
ing quality. This granularity is shown in qualitative results
in Fig. 5. Beyond high rendering quality, GaME is able to
accurately resolve changes also for challenging cases such
as small cutlery on the table and flat paintings on the walls.
5.2. Ablation Studies
Add and Remove operations are important for Dynamic
Scene Adaptation.
We ablate the components of DSA
in Tab. 3, showing that its presence significantly improves
performance. While differences between individual DSA
variants are less pronounced in final rendering quality, due
to keyframe optimization correcting finer detail, combining
both operations consistently yields the best performance.

<!-- page 7 -->
SplaTAM [11]
MonoGS [18]
DG-SLAM [36]
GaME (Ours)
Ground Truth
A
B
C
Figure 5. Qualitative Results. Comparison across different long-term scene changes. (A) A black office chair appears in the scene; (B)
the toy house and chair are moved, the picture is moved from the table to the shelf; (C) the cutlery on the table is replaced, the painting and
the right chair are moved. GaME is the only method that captures the scene evolution and preserves high rendering quality.
Methods
Scene
PSNR [dB] ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 [cm] ↓
SplaTAM [11]
room0
1.80 / 16.75
0.78 / 0.45
0.24 / 0.44
4.12 / 17.79
room1
22.94 / 17.90
0.81 / 0.54
0.22 / 0.44
2.84 / 15.90
Avg
22.37 / 17.33
0.80 / 0.50
0.23 / 0.44
3.48 / 16.80
MonoGS [18]
room0
25.28 / 25.19
0.78 / 0.78
0.28 / 0.27
5.15 / 5.09
room1
23.12 / 23.02
0.84 / 0.84
0.24 / 0.24
4.99 / 5.01
Avg
24.20 / 24.11
0.81 / 0.81
0.26 / 0.26
5.07 / 5.05
DG-SLAM [16]
room0
15.78 / 15.63
0.58 / 0.58
0.76 / 0.76
67.60 / 69.05
room1
12.62 / 12.44
0.65 / 0.64
0.70 / 0.71
55.47 / 57.03
Avg
14.20 / 14.04
0.62 / 0.61
0.73 / 0.74
61.54 / 63.04
GaME (Ours)
room0
31.54 / 31.48
0.95 / 0.95
0.14 / 0.14
0.69 / 0.69
room1
31.23 / 31.97
0.95 / 0.95
0.10 / 0.10
1.75 / 1.80
Avg
31.39 / 31.23
0.95 / 0.95
0.12 / 0.12
1.22 / 1.24
Table 2.
Rendering performance on the Aria dataset.
Our
method significantly outperforms other baselines thanks to dy-
namic scene adaptaion and keyframe management system. Met-
rics are reported for input / novel views.
Method
PSNR [dB] ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 [cm] ↓
No DSA
21.25 / 21.08
0.87 / 0.87
0.2 / 0.2
29.20 / 27.20
Add
23.34 / 23.07
0.92 / 0.91
0.15 / 0.15
11.00 / 11.20
Remove
24.13 / 23.89
0.93 / 0.93
0.14 / 0.14
9.50 / 8.20
Add and Remove (Ours)
24.55 / 24.26
0.93 / 0.93
0.14 / 0.14
6.9 / 7.9
Table 3. Dynamic Scene Adaptation (DSA) ablation on the Flat
dataset. Combining Add and Remove operations gives the best
performance. Metrics are reported for input / novel views.
Our Keyframe Management system preserves useful in-
formation. In Tab. 4, we compare keeping all keyframes
against ignoring stale keyframes and ignoring only stale re-
gions. We observe that the naive approach to 3DGS map-
ping in evolving scenes by discarding conflicting keyframes
Method
PSNR [dB] ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 [cm] ↓
No KF Filtering
23.57 / 23.31
0.92 / 0.92
0.15 / 0.14
6.70 / 7.20
Full KF Filtering
13.72 / 13.34
0.58 / 0.57
0.56 / 0.55
764.40 / 763.30
Partial KF Filtering (Ours)
24.55 / 24.26
0.93 / 0.93
0.14 / 0.14
6.9 / 7.9
Table 4. Keyframe management ablation on the Flat dataset.
Retaining keyframes is essential to constrain the background, but
conflicting regions must be accurately filtered to avoid artifacts.
can leave parts of the scene severely under-constrained,
leading to the worst outcome.
Ignoring changes (no fil-
tering) achieves clear background rendering (note that the
background accounts for the majority of pixels and domi-
nates the losses), but inevitably results in artifacts and in-
consistencies for changed regions, as seen in Fig. 5. Our
proposed approach highlights the importance of retaining
information about the background and resolving conflicts
in keyframes for 3DGS optimization.
GaME can handle noisy poses. We evaluate the camera
poses on the Aria dataset with an external SLAM [18] sys-
tem and use the estimated poses and keyframes instead of
ground truth in Tab. 5. GaME is robust even when the pose
estimation is not precise, exhibiting only a marginal perfor-
mance drop under noisy pose conditions.
GaME can reconstruct static scenes. While our method
is specifically designed to reconstruct evolving scenes, it
should not lose the ability to reconstruct static scenes. Re-
sults on the TUM-RGBD dataset shown in Tab. 6 show that
GaME performs on par with state-of-the-art systems. This

<!-- page 8 -->
Camera Poses
PSNR [dB] ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 [cm] ↓
Ground-truth
31.54 / 31.48
0.95 / 0.95
0.14 / 0.14
0.69 / 0.69
Estimated
31.45 / 31.53
0.95 / 0.95
0.14 / 0.14
0.70 / 0.70
Table 5. Effect of noisy poses on Aria room0. GaME is robust to
camera pose noise, showing no significant impact on performance
when using estimated poses instead of ground truth. Camera poses
and keyframes are estimated with an off-the-shelf method [18].
Method
desk
xyz
office
Average
SplaTAM [11]
20.92
21.03
21.61
21.19
MonoGS [18]
17.41
15.09
19.93
17.48
GaME (Ours)
20.18
21.01
20.71
20.63
Table 6. Rendering performance on the TUM-RGBD dataset.
PSNR [dB]↑is reported for input views.
Metric
SplaTAM [11]
MonoGS [18]
DG-SLAM [36]
GaME (Ours)
FPS ↑
0.13
4.21
0.25
0.52
Table 7. Runtime analysis on the Flat dataset. FPS is calculated
by dividing the mapping time by the total number of frames. All
metrics are profiled on an NVIDIA RTX 3090 GPU.
Method
PSNR [dB] ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 [cm] ↓
No Refinement
23.70 / 23.46
0.92 / 0.92
0.16 / 0.16
7.2 / 6.6
With Refinement
24.55 / 24.26
0.93 / 0.93
0.14 / 0.14
7.9 / 6.6
Table 8. Final refinement ablation on the Flat dataset. While
refinement can further improve rendering quality, GaME already
converges well during incremental processing.
suggests that the introduced DSA and keyframe manage-
ment are robust to noise and false positives in model up-
dates and masking, which could deteriorate performance.
In the future, GaME could well be combined with tracking
and registration methods to improve performance, however,
this is currently beyond the scope of this work.
GaME is an online mapping system. While addressing
scene changes requires additional computation time, our
method performs on par with standard 3DGS reconstruction
systems as shown in Tab. 7. While the run time is not yet
real-time, our approach is of an incremental nature with par-
tial optimization performed on every new keyframe. We be-
lieve that future improvements in 3DGS optimization speed
will translate well to GaME without incurring notable extra
cost to handle evolving scenes. Optionally, our approach
lends itself to further final refinement. Both options are
shown in Tab. 8. While refinement can potentially improve
the final rendering quality, we note that the model is already
well converged after incremental processing.
GaME is robust. Since the main focus of our work is on
the architectural challenges when handling evolving scenes
in 3DGS and not image-based change detection, we opted
for a comparably simple threshold-based approach. While
Hyperparameter
PSNR
PSNR
Depth L1 [cm]
Depth L1 [cm]
Mean (↑)
Std. Dev. (↓)
Mean (↓)
Std. Dev. (↓)
ϵdepth
31.52
0.21
0.68
0.03
ϵcolor
31.58
0.14
0.69
0.01
ϵopacity
31.56
0.11
0.68
0.01
Table 9.
Hyperparameters robustness on the Aria room0
dataset. GaME is robust to hyperparameter variation.
GaME is readily extendable with more complex methods
such as [16], we already find good performance and that
GaME is robust w.r.t.
critical hyperparameters.
First,
most of our hyperparameters have an interpretable mean-
ing, making them intuitive and requiring minimal effort
to adjust. For instance, to determine ϵdepth, ϵcolor, we in-
spected the rendering error in color and depth caused by
adding a small object (e.g., a cup on the table) to the scene.
For keyframe selection, we adopted standard rotation and
translation thresholds [11, 40]. We experimentally show
GaME to be robust w.r.t. hyperparameters by varying key
parameters ϵdepth, ϵcolor, ϵopacity with steps from the set of
{−20%, −10%, 10%, 20%} and report the mean and stan-
dard deviation of PSNR and Depth L1 error on the Flat
dataset in Tab. 9. The minimal variation in scores confirms
that our method does not rely on sensitive parameter tuning.
6. Limitations
While GaME currently demonstrates robust rendering per-
formance in evolving long-term dynamic scenes, several
notable limitations exist. First, it does not yet handle short-
term dynamic objects, which would result in inefficient ad-
dition and removal. Extending the dynamic scene adapta-
tion mechanism to consider both dynamics is an exciting
future direction. Second, we primarily study mapping with
external pose tracking. Although sparse odometry systems
can reject many changes as outliers [2], change-aware track-
ing mechanisms are an exciting future direction. Finally,
while GaME builds a consistent model of the scene at the
final time, it would be interesting to explore a complete 4D
representation of the history of all changes.
7. Conclusions
We presented GaME, the first online mapping system for
evolving scenes with novel view synthesis capabilities.
GaME utilizes novel dynamic scene adaptation operations
to detect and correct conflicts in the incrementally built
3DGS model. Our keyframe management method further-
more appropriately ignores stale areas in keyframes, re-
taining useful information while correcting for changed
regions, resulting in a well-conditioned 3DGS optimiza-
tion process. We thoroughly evaluate GaME on synthetic
and real-world datasets, demonstrating 29.7% improvement
in PSNR, over 3×-improvement in L1 depth error, and
artifact-free novel view synthesis in evolving scenes. The
code and data are released open-source.

<!-- page 9 -->
Acknowledgements. This work was supported by Tom-
Tom, the University of Amsterdam, Amazon, ARL DCIST
program, and the allowance of Top Consortia for Knowl-
edge and Innovation (TKIs) from the Netherlands Ministry
of Economic Affairs and Climate Policy.
References
[1] Rares¸ Ambrus¸, Nils Bore, John Folkesson, and Patric Jens-
felt. Meta-rooms: Building and maintaining long term spa-
tial models in a dynamic world. pages 1854–1861. IEEE,
2014. 2
[2] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J G´omez Rodr´ıguez,
Jos´e MM Montiel, and Juan D Tard´os.
Orb-slam3: An
accurate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and
multimap slam. IEEE transactions on robotics, 37(6):1874–
1890, 2021. 8
[3] Devikalyan Das, Christopher Wewer, Raza Yunus, Eddy
Ilg, and Jan Eric Lenssen. Neural parametric gaussians for
monocular non-rigid object reconstruction. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, pages 10715–10725, 2024. 2
[4] Yuanxing Duan, Fangyin Wei, Qiyu Dai, Yuhang He, Wen-
zheng Chen, and Baoquan Chen. 4d-rotor gaussian splatting:
Towards efficient novel-view synthesis for dynamic scenes.
In Proc. SIGGRAPH, 2024. 2
[5] Marius Fehr, Fadri Furrer, Ivan Dryanovski, J¨urgen Sturm,
Igor Gilitschenski, Roland Siegwart, and Cesar Cadena.
Tsdf-based change detection for consistent long-term dense
reconstruction and dynamic object discovery. pages 5237–
5244. IEEE, 2017. 2, 4
[6] Jiahui Fu, Yilun Du, Kurran Singh, Joshua B Tenenbaum,
and John J Leonard. Robust change detection based on neu-
ral descriptor fields. In 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Confer-
ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 2817–
2824. IEEE, 2022. 2
[7] Jiahui Fu, Chengyuan Lin, Yuichi Taguchi, Andrea Co-
hen, Yifu Zhang, Stephen Mylabathula, and John J Leonard.
Planesdf-based change detection for long-term dense map-
ping.
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 7(4):9667–
9674, 2022. 2
[8] Jiahui Fu, Yilun Du, Kurran Singh, Joshua B Tenenbaum,
and John J Leonard. Neuse: Neural se (3)-equivariant em-
bedding for consistent spatial understanding with objects.
2023. 2, 3
[9] Huajian Huang, Longwei Li, Cheng Hui, and Sai-Kit Yeung.
Photo-slam: Real-time simultaneous localization and photo-
realistic mapping for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024. 2
[10] Kai Katsumata, Duc Minh Vo, and Hideki Nakayama. A
compact dynamic 3d gaussian representation for&nbsp;real-
time dynamic view synthesis. page 394–412, Berlin, Heidel-
berg, 2024. Springer-Verlag. 2
[11] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula,
Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan, and
Jonathon Luiten. Splatam: Splat, track & map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Con-
ference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8
[12] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler,
and George Drettakis.
3d gaussian splatting for real-time
radiance field rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42
(4), 2023. 2, 3, 6
[13] Giseop Kim and Ayoung Kim.
Lt-mapper: A modular
framework for lidar-based lifelong mapping.
In 2022 In-
ternational Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pages 7995–8002. IEEE, 2022. 2, 4
[14] Alexander Kirillov, Eric Mintun, Nikhila Ravi, Hanzi Mao,
Chloe Rolland, Laura Gustafson, Tete Xiao, Spencer White-
head, Alexander C. Berg, Wan-Yen Lo, Piotr Doll´ar, and
Ross Girshick. Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
5, 6
[15] Edith Langer, Timothy Patten, and Markus Vincze. Robust
and efficient object change detection by combining global se-
mantic information and local geometric verification. In 2020
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots
and Systems (IROS), pages 8453–8460. IEEE, 2020. 2
[16] Ziqi Lu, Jianbo Ye, and John Leonard. 3dgs-cd: 3d gaus-
sian splatting-based change detection for physical object re-
arrangement. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
2, 6, 7, 8
[17] Jonathon Luiten, Georgios Kopanas, Bastian Leibe, and
Deva Ramanan. Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking by per-
sistent dynamic view synthesis. In IEEE International Con-
ference on 3D Vision, 2024. 2
[18] Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul H. J. Kelly, and An-
drew J. Davison. Gaussian Splatting SLAM. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition, 2024. 1, 2, 5, 6, 7, 8
[19] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P. Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T. Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthe-
sis. Commun. ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021. 2
[20] Riku Murai, Eric Dexheimer, and Andrew J. Davison.
MASt3R-SLAM: Real-time dense SLAM with 3D recon-
struction priors. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2025. 1
[21] Xiaqing Pan, Nicholas Charron, Yongqian Yang, Scott Pe-
ters, Thomas Whelan, Chen Kong, Omkar Parkhi, Richard
Newcombe, and Carl Yuheng Ren.
Aria digital twin: A
new benchmark dataset for egocentric 3d machine percep-
tion, 2023. 6
[22] Jingxing Qian, Veronica Chatrath, Jun Yang, James Servos,
Angela P Schoellig, and Steven L Waslander. Pocd: Prob-
abilistic object-level change detection and volumetric map-
ping in semi-static scenes. 2022. 2
[23] Jingxing Qian, Veronica Chatrath, James Servos, Aaron
Mavrinac, Wolfram Burgard, Steven L Waslander, and An-
gela P Schoellig. Pov-slam: Probabilistic object-aware vari-
ational slam in semi-static environments. 2023. 2, 4
[24] Adam Rashid, Chung Min Kim, Justin Kerr, Letian Fu, Kush
Hari, Ayah Ahmad, Kaiyuan Chen, Huang Huang, Mar-
cus Gualtieri, Michael Wang, et al.
Lifelong lerf: Local

<!-- page 10 -->
3d semantic inventory monitoring using fogros2. In 2024
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pages 7740–7747. IEEE, 2024. 2
[25] Antoni Rosinol, Andrew Violette, Marcus Abate, Nathan
Hughes, Yun Chang, Jingnan Shi, Arjun Gupta, and Luca
Carlone. Kimera: From slam to spatial perception with 3d
dynamic scene graphs. The International Journal of Robotics
Research, 40(12-14):1510–1546, 2021. 1
[26] Joseph Rowell, Lintong Zhang, and Maurice Fallon. Lista:
Geometric object-based change detection in cluttered en-
vironments.
In 2024 IEEE International Conference on
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 3632–3638. IEEE,
2024. 2, 3, 4
[27] Lukas Schmid, Jeffrey Delmerico, Johannes L. Sch¨onberger,
Juan Nieto, Marc Pollefeys, Roland Siegwart, and Cesar Ca-
dena. Panoptic Multi-TSDFs: a Flexible Representation for
Online Multi-resolution Volumetric Mapping and Long-term
Dynamic Scene Consistency. In 2022 International Confer-
ence on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 8018–8024,
2022. ICRA. 2, 3, 6
[28] Lukas Schmid, Marcus Abate, Yun Chang, and Luca Car-
lone.
Khronos: A unified approach for spatio-temporal
metric-semantic slam in dynamic environments. In Proc. of
Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2024. 1, 2, 4
[29] Lukas Schmid, Jos´e Mar´ıa Mart´ınez Montiel, Shoudong
Huang, Daniel Cremers, Jos´e Neira, and Javier Civera. Dy-
namic and deformable SLAM. In SLAM Handbook. From
Localization and Mapping to Spatial Intelligence. Cam-
bridge University Press, 2026. 1
[30] Qiuhong Shen, Xingyi Yang, and Xinchao Wang. Flashsplat:
2d to 3d gaussian splatting segmentation solved optimally.
European Conference of Computer Vision, 2024. 5
[31] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cre-
mers. A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems.
In Proc. of the International Conference on Intelligent Robot
Systems (IROS), 2012. 6
[32] Johanna Wald, Armen Avetisyan, Nassir Navab, Federico
Tombari, and Matthias Nießner. Rio: 3d object instance re-
localization in changing indoor environments. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Com-
puter Vision, pages 7658–7667, 2019. 2, 3
[33] Zhou Wang, Alan C Bovik, Hamid R Sheikh, and Eero P Si-
moncelli. Image quality assessment: from error visibility to
structural similarity. IEEE transactions on image processing,
13(4):600–612, 2004. 3, 6
[34] Guanjun Wu, Taoran Yi, Jiemin Fang, Lingxi Xie, Xiaopeng
Zhang, Wei Wei, Wenyu Liu, Qi Tian, and Xinggang Wang.
4d gaussian splatting for real-time dynamic scene render-
ing. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 20310–
20320, 2024. 2
[35] Yunyang Xiong, Bala Varadarajan, Lemeng Wu, Xiaoyu Xi-
ang, Fanyi Xiao, Chenchen Zhu, Xiaoliang Dai, Dilin Wang,
Fei Sun, Forrest Iandola, et al.
Efficientsam: Leveraged
masked image pretraining for efficient segment anything. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vi-
sion and Pattern Recognition, pages 16111–16121, 2024. 2
[36] Yueming Xu, Haochen Jiang, Zhongyang Xiao, Jianfeng
Feng, and Li Zhang.
DG-SLAM: Robust dynamic gaus-
sian splatting SLAM with hybrid pose optimization.
In
The Thirty-eighth Annual Conference on Neural Information
Processing Systems, 2024. 2, 5, 7, 8
[37] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dan Xu, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong
Wang, and Xuelong Li. Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d
gaussian splatting. In CVPR, 2024. 2
[38] Ziyi Yang, Xinyu Gao, Wen Zhou, Shaohui Jiao, Yuqing
Zhang, and Xiaogang Jin. Deformable 3d gaussians for high-
fidelity monocular dynamic scene reconstruction.
In Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2024. 2
[39] Zeyu Yang, Hongye Yang, Zijie Pan, and Li Zhang. Real-
time photorealistic dynamic scene representation and render-
ing with 4d gaussian splatting. In International Conference
on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2024. 2
[40] Vladimir Yugay, Yue Li, Theo Gevers, and Martin R. Os-
wald. Gaussian-slam: Photo-realistic dense slam with gaus-
sian splatting, 2023. 2, 3, 4, 5, 8
[41] Richard Zhang, Phillip Isola, Alexei A Efros, Eli Shechtman,
and Oliver Wang. The unreasonable effectiveness of deep
features as a perceptual metric. In IEEE conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition, pages 586–595, 2018.
6
[42] Jianhao Zheng, Zihan Zhu, Valentin Bieri, Marc Pollefeys,
Songyou Peng, and Iro Armeni.
Wildgs-slam: Monocu-
lar gaussian splatting slam in dynamic environments. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2504.03886, 2025. 2, 6
[43] Liyuan Zhu, Shengyu Huang, Konrad Schindler, and Iro Ar-
meni. Living scenes: Multi-object relocalization and recon-
struction in changing 3d environments. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, pages 28014–28024, 2024. 2
[44] Matthias Zwicker, Hanspeter Pfister, Jeroen Van Baar, and
Markus Gross.
Surface splatting.
In Proceedings of the
28th annual conference on Computer graphics and interac-
tive techniques, pages 371–378, 2001. 3
