<!-- page 1 -->
S3LAM: Surfel Splatting SLAM for Geometrically Accurate
Tracking and Mapping
Ruoyu Fan1, Yuhui Wen2, Jiajia Dai1, Tao Zhang3, Long Zeng4, Yong-jin Liu1
1Department of Computer Science and Technology, Tsinghua University
2School of Computer Science and Technology, Beijing Jiaotong University
3Pudu Robotics, 4Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School
Abstract
We propose S3LAM, a novel RGB-D SLAM system that
leverages 2D surfel splatting to achieve highly accurate ge-
ometric representations for simultaneous tracking and map-
ping. Unlike existing 3DGS-based SLAM approaches that
rely on 3D Gaussian ellipsoids, we utilize 2D Gaussian sur-
fels as primitives for more efficient scene representation. By
focusing on the surfaces of objects in the scene, this design
enables S3LAM to reconstruct high-quality geometry, bene-
fiting both mapping and tracking. To address inherent SLAM
challenges including real-time optimization under limited
viewpoints, we introduce a novel adaptive surface rendering
strategy that improves mapping accuracy while maintaining
computational efficiency. We further derive camera pose Ja-
cobians directly from 2D surfel splatting formulation, high-
lighting the importance of our geometrically accurate repre-
sentation that improves tracking convergence. Extensive ex-
periments on both synthetic and real-world datasets validate
that S3LAM achieves state-of-the-art performance. Code will
be made publicly available.
Introduction
Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is a cru-
cial component in various applications, such as autonomous
driving, mobile robotics, and augmented reality. Over the
past few decades, SLAM research has explored various
representations for scene reconstruction, including point
clouds (Davison et al. 2007), meshes (Ruetz et al. 2019), and
voxel grids (Dai et al. 2017; Newcombe et al. 2011), which
have achieved good tracking and mapping performance.
Recently, representing scenes with neural radiance
fields (NeRF) (Mildenhall et al. 2021) has gained signifi-
cant attention in SLAM research (Sucar et al. 2021; Yang
et al. 2022). These approaches combine view rendering and
surface reconstruction with dense visual SLAM, expanding
the potential applications of SLAM systems. Along this di-
rection, a growing trend in visual SLAM is the use of 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) (Kerbl et al. 2023) for scene
mapping. Compared to radiance fields, 3DGS offers superior
rendering speed, enhanced interpretability and flexible ex-
tensibility. 3DGS-based SLAM systems effectively integrate
3D Gaussian splatting techniques, incorporating innovations
in Gaussian management (Yan et al. 2024), pose optimiza-
tion (Matsuki et al. 2024), and uncertainty estimation (Hu
Figure 1: Compared to state-of-the-art 3DGS-based SLAM
systems (Peng et al. 2024; Keetha et al. 2024), our method
achieves geometrically accurate scene reconstruction with
fine details (Left vs. RTG-SLAM on Room2, Replica) and
improved convergence in camera pose tracking (Right vs.
SplaTAM on S1, ScanNet++).
et al. 2025). These advancements demonstrate the signifi-
cant potential of 3DGS for SLAM applications.
Our work is motivated by the following observation:
3DGS-based SLAM methods reconstruct scenes using in-
verse rendering that prioritizes color consistency, which of-
ten compromises the reconstruction of fine geometric de-
tails such as surfaces. Since tracking and mapping are tightly
coupled in SLAM, degraded mapping representation can in
turn deteriorate tracking performance. The inherent charac-
teristics of 3DGS constrain the SLAM performance in both
mapping and tracking, as summarized below:
• Mapping: 3DGS reconstructs scene geometry by fitting
the average depth of projected ellipsoids. Due to the lack
of explicit surface normals, it struggles to accurately rep-
resent object surfaces, leading to visual artifacts and ge-
ometric inconsistencies across views.
• Tracking: Similarly, the absence of explicit surface nor-
mals in 3DGS restricts camera tracking to only optimize
the value of Gaussian distribution functions, making it
difficult for the estimated camera rotations to align with
the true surface orientations in the scene.
To overcome the above limitations, in this paper, we adopt
2D Gaussian surfel splatting as scene representation primi-
tives, inspired by the recent success of offline 2D Gaussian
splatting approaches (Huang et al. 2024; Dai et al. 2024). For
SLAM applications with limited Gaussian primitives, we in-
troduce an adaptive surface reconstruction strategy that dy-
namically refines geometry. Furthermore, we present a novel
arXiv:2507.20854v1  [cs.CV]  28 Jul 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
pose estimation algorithm that explicitly leverages 2D sur-
fels to robustly handle extreme viewpoint changes.
To sum up, we propose Surfel Splatting SLAM (S3LAM),
a novel system designed to achieve geometrically accurate
mapping and tracking through 2D Gaussian surfel represen-
tations. S3LAM integrates forward rendering for scene re-
construction with backward gradient propagation to jointly
optimize color, depth, and normal estimation. To enable on-
line adaptive mapping, we first quantify the uncertainty in
different regions by introducing a depth distortion term dur-
ing optimization. This distortion term identifies areas under
construction in mapping, triggering our adaptive reconstruc-
tion strategy that replaces uncertain geometry with dominant
surfels. For camera tracking, we derive an analytic Jacobian
on Lie algebra for the surfel splatting map. Our approach
incorporates a radial gradient in the surfel-based Jacobian,
enabling explicit alignment optimization between the cam-
era orientation and reconstructed surfaces. These designs en-
able our method to achieve accurate geometric reconstruc-
tion and robust tracking convergence (Figure 1).
Our contributions made in this paper include:
• We propose S3LAM, a novel real-time SLAM system
that utilizes 2D Gaussian surfel primitives to achieve
both accurate and efficient scene representation.
• We introduce an online adaptive mapping strategy cou-
pled with a novel surfel-based pose estimation algo-
rithm, significantly improving tracking and mapping per-
formance in SLAM under challenging conditions such as
severe viewpoint changes.
• We validate the effectiveness of surfel-based tracking
through convergence basin analysis. S3LAM demon-
strates state-of-the-art performance in both mapping
and tracking compared to NeRF-based and 3DGS-based
SLAM systems on multiple datasets.
Related Work
Dense Visual SLAM aims to achieve simultaneous local-
ization and mapping through reconstructing dense 3D scene
representations. Early breakthroughs, e.g., DTAM (New-
combe, Lovegrove, and Davison 2011) and KinectFu-
sion (Newcombe et al. 2011), laid the foundation for dense
SLAM by leveraging photometric consistency and TSDF fu-
sion, respectively, to represent and update the scene. Subse-
quent works, such as ElasticFusion (Whelan et al. 2016) and
DI-Fusion (Huang et al. 2021), explored a wide range of map
representations, including point clouds, surfels, voxel hash-
ing and octrees, to tackle challenges in scalability and accu-
racy. In parallel, recent advancements have integrated deep
learning into traditional frameworks, e.g., SceneCode (Zhi
et al. 2019), NodeSLAM (Sucar, Wada, and Davison 2020)
and DROID-SLAM (Teed and Deng 2021), to achieve robust
camera tracking and mapping. These developments signifi-
cantly expanded the applications of dense SLAM systems.
NeRF-based SLAM has emerged as a powerful ap-
proach for dense visual SLAM, leveraging the advance-
ments in neural radiance fields (NeRF), to jointly opti-
mize scene representation and camera poses. iMAP (Sucar
et al. 2021) introduced single-MLP-based scene representa-
tion for scalable mapping. NICE-SLAM (Zhu et al. 2022)
and Vox-Fusion (Yang et al. 2022) incorporated hierarchi-
cal voxel grids and octree structures, to enhance scalabil-
ity and precision. Recently, Point-SLAM (Sandstr¨om et al.
2023) achieved detailed reconstruction by using neural point
clouds with volumetric rendering. However, due to the com-
putational requirements of volume rendering, it faces chal-
lenges in real-time performance. Although these methods
have demonstrated remarkable accuracy, their reliance on
memory-intensive structures and time-consuming rendering
limits their scalability and real-time applicability.
3DGS-based SLAM. Recent advancements have inte-
grated 3D Gaussians into RGB-D dense SLAM systems,
to represent and render high-quality scenes. The pioneer-
ing work (Kerbl et al. 2023) demonstrated the effectiveness
of 3D Gaussians in photorealistic real-time rendering, but
their optimization processes were offline and computation-
ally expensive. To adapt Gaussians for online reconstruction,
Yan et al. (2024) introduced adaptive expansion and coarse-
to-fine tracking. SplaTAM (Keetha et al. 2024) tailored a
pipeline to optimize Gaussians with silhouette-guided differ-
entiable rendering. Matsuki et al. (2024) presented isotropic
Gaussian-based tracking, mapping, and rendering for RGBD
SLAM. Despite these innovations, real-time performance in
large-scale scenes remains challenging. RTG-SLAM (Peng
et al. 2024) sought to unify Gaussian splats for real-time
tracking and mapping. A concurrent work GauS-SLAM (Su
et al. 2025) also adopted 2D Gaussian surfels as the repre-
sentation in SLAM. However, their focus lies primarily on
local mapping and surfel management, whereas our method
emphasizes high-certainty surface reconstruction and surfel-
based pose tracking with strong convergence properties.
We begin by briefly summarizing the 2D Gaussian surfel
splatting technique, followed by a detailed presentation of
our S3LAM system.
Preliminary on 2D Gaussian Surfel Splatting
Our S3LAM system adopts 2D Gaussian surfels (Huang
et al. 2024) to represent the scenes, in which surfel splat-
ting is performed by blending Gaussian surfels intersected
by rays from image pixels. A surfel is characterized by its
center pk, along with two principal tangential vectors tu and
tv, and their corresponding scaling factors su and sv. The
normal vector is defined by the cross product tw = tu × tv,
and the rotation matrix is represented as R = [tu, tv, tw].
A local point on a Gaussian surfel is parameterized by the
(u, v) coordinates:
Pk(u, v) = pk + sutuu + svtvv
(1)
The local coordinates (u, v) are computed by solving the
equation z(x, y, 1) = [R | t]Pk(u, v), where z(x, y, 1) is the
point in the camera coordinate system, and [R | t] represents
the transformation matrix consisting of the rotation matrix
R and translation vector t. Given the local coordinates, the
ray-surfel transparency ωi is calculated as follows:
Gk(u(x)) = exp(−u2/2 −v2/2)
(2)
ωi = αi Gi(u(x))
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αjGj(u(x)))
(3)

<!-- page 3 -->
Figure 2: Overview of the proposed S3LAM System. The scene is represented by 2D Gaussian surfels to achieve geometry-
aligned motion tracking and scene mapping. Both the tracking and mapping phases benefit from our oriented surfel primitives,
leveraging the proposed adaptive rendering and surfel-based pose estimation. Our system outputs the motion trajectory and a
reconstructed mesh model of the scene after post-processing.
Here, u(x) denotes the local coordinates (u, v) deter-
mined by the intersection between the pixel ray from x and
the surfel plane. αi is the inherent opacity of the i-th surfel.
Color, depth, and normal values are rendered using alpha
blending, which is computed as the weighted sum of alpha
weights ωk in a front-to-back order of Gaussian surfels:
C(x) =
K
X
k=1
ωk ck, D(x) =
K
X
k=1
ωk zk/
K
X
k=1
ωk, N(x) =
K
X
k=1
ωk tw
(4)
where ck represents the color feature vector of the k-th
surfel, and zk represents the z-coordinate of the world point
Pk(u, v) transformed into the camera coordinate system.
With the Gaussian surfel representation, our map is denoted
as S = {(pk, tu, tv, su, sv, ck, αk)}.
Method
We propose S3LAM (short for Surfel Splatting SLAM), a
novel RGB-D SLAM system that leverages 2D surfel splat-
ting for robust and efficient scene mapping. This section is
organized as follows: (1) we introduce the 2D Gaussian sur-
fel splatting technique for an efficient map representation;
(2) then we present our adaptive reconstruction and surfel
management strategy using uncertainty measures, and (3) fi-
nally we propose a novel pose optimization algorithm by
deriving surfel Jacobians, which improves tracking conver-
gence. The overview of the whole S3LAM system is illus-
trated in Figure 2.
Surfel Splatting Mapping
Given the RGB-D input stream { ¯Ct, ¯Dt}N
t=1, we first com-
pute the local normal map ¯Nt, by calculating the spatial gra-
dients of the depth map (Newcombe et al. 2011). With the
pose TCW estimated by the camera tracking module, the
surfels are rendered to determine color Ct, depth Dt and
normal Nt. The mapping optimization loss is defined as a
weighted mixture of L1 losses and cosine similarity:
Lmap =
Ct −¯Ct

1+γD
Dt −¯Dt

1+γN
 1 −Nt · ¯Nt

(5)
where ∥·∥1 denotes L1 loss over image pixels, Nt · ¯Nt
represents the pixel-wise cosine similarity between the
groundtruth normal and estimated normal.
Adaptive Surface Mapping. The original surfel splatting
technique (Huang et al. 2024) is offline, which can effec-
tively reconstruct scene geometry under sufficient optimiza-
tion iterations, using a large number of surfels for represen-
tation and ensuring complete multiview coverage. However,
in SLAM systems, the time constraints imposed by real-time
mapping and tracking optimization necessitate the use of a
reduced number of surfels and a rapidly converging pipeline.
Under these constraints, conventional surfel splatting often
results in incomplete surface reconstruction, particularly at
sharp geometric features such as edges and corners, thereby
compromising the accuracy of surface modeling.
To introduce 2D surfel splatting into a real-time SLAM
system, we propose an adaptive rendering strategy that
can be seamlessly integrated into the surfel rasterization
pipeline, leveraging a depth distortion term Dd to identify
the uncertainty of pixel rays. Dd is defined as:
Dd =
X
i,j
ωiωj|zi −zj|
(6)
where ωi is the same as in Eq. (3), and zi is the depth of the
i-th intersection point. The depth distortion term was origi-
nally used to consolidate separate volumes belonging to the
same surface (Barron et al. 2022). Given a limited number of
surfels, regions with high depth distortion typically contain
multiple surfels exhibiting large variations in depth zi and
a relatively uniform distribution of blending weights ωi. In
our work, we leverage depth distortion as a separation metric
to guide accurate surface reconstruction.

<!-- page 4 -->
Based on the above observation, we define the uncertainty
mask as Dd > τ, where τ represents the distortion threshold.
For pixels with uncertainty exceeding τ, depth and normal
values are determined not through opacity-weighted aver-
ages, but rather by selecting the surfel with the maximum
blending weight. The depth and normal values are then di-
rectly determined by the intersection of the ray with the
plane defined by this surfel:
Dc(x) = arg max
ωk
zk, Nc(x) = arg max
ωk
tw
(7)
It is worth noting that the degradation of Gaussian surfels
into concrete surfels may inadvertently affect large planar
surfaces, potentially resulting in artifacts such as holes on
the reconstructed surfaces. To address this issue, we selec-
tively replace the rendered depth D and normal N with Dc
and Nc only when D(x) > Dc(x). This conditional substi-
tution ensures that our adaptive mapping strategy preserves
surface integrity while effectively managing uncertainty.
Our adaptive rendering strategy is readily integrated into
the surfel rasterization pipeline in both the forward and
backward passes, requiring only the retention of dominant
surfel information during pixel rasterization. With negligi-
ble computational overhead, our strategy simultaneously im-
proves sharp geometry representation and effectively identi-
fies regions of high uncertainty.
Surfel Management. We adopt the surfel addition and
deletion operations proposed in (Yan et al. 2024; Peng et al.
2024). During each mapping step, new surfels are added
based on three criteria: (1) pixels that remain highly trans-
parent (transmission exceeding a threshold δT ); (2) pixels
exhibiting large depth errors (exceeding a threshold δd);
and (3) pixels with significant color reconstruction errors
(exceeding a threshold δc). Erroneous pixels identified by
these criteria are uniformly sampled, projected back into 3D
space, and incorporated into the surfel set. For surfel dele-
tion, surfels whose accumulated average errors exceed twice
the corresponding thresholds are removed in each iteration.
Camera Motion Tracking
In the pose tracking module of S3LAM, we utilize the ana-
lytical Jacobian of SE(3) derived from the backward gradi-
ent of the surfel splatting. This algorithm is tightly coupled
with our model representation, which enhances system ro-
bustness and significantly improves convergence speed.
Pose Tracking with Surfel Splatting. Surfel splatting has
demonstrated its capability for accurate geometric represen-
tation. Building on this, we aim to show that pose tracking
can also benefit from enhanced surface accuracy. Follow-
ing (Sol`a, Deray, and Atchuthan 2021), we use the Lie alge-
bra framework to derive pose Jacobians, encompassing the
3 degrees of freedom of the rotation group SO(3) and the
3 degrees of freedom for translation R3. Pose optimization
is formulated as minimizing the following loss with respect
to camera pose TCW consisting of rotation matrix R and
translation vector t:
Ltrack = λC
C(S, TCW ) −¯C

1 + λD
D(S, TCW ) −¯D

1 .
(8)
where C(S, TCW ) and D(S, TCW ) are the rendered image
and depth map, respectively, derived from the surfel repre-
sentation S and the estimated pose TCW ∈SE(3).
Figure 3: Comparison between 3DGS-based and 2D-
surfel-based pose optimization. Left: In 3DGS-based ap-
proaches, the optimization relies solely on the Jacobian
∂ω
∂TCW
to adjust the projected Gaussian function value,
which is constrained to move perpendicular to equipotential
surfaces. Right: The 2D-based Jacobian additionally intro-
duces the radial component
∂ˆtr
∂TCW that points directly to-
wards the surfel center.
For the color loss Lc =
C(S, TCW ) −¯C

1, the gradient
is propagated through the surfel’s central point and its two
tangential vectors:
∂Lc
∂TCW
=
X
x, k
∂Lc
∂C(x)
∂C(x)
∂ωk,x
∂ωk,x
∂ˆqk
∂ˆqk
∂TCW
(9)
where ˆqk = (pk, tu, tv) denotes the positional parameters
of the k-th surfel in camera coordinates. Most terms in our
derivation align with standard 3DGS terminology, and the
Jacobians’ formulation of the tangent vectors is derived in
supplementary material.
While the gradient of the color loss with respect to the
pose is built upon the same alpha blending framework in
both 3D Gaussian spheres and 2D surfels, their formula-
tions for depth rendering differ significantly. In 3DGS, the
depth is computed as a weighted average of the projected
Gaussian centers: D(x) = P
i
ωi ˆpi,z where ˆpi,z is the
z-coordinate of the i-th Gaussian center after being trans-
formed under the current viewpoint (Yan et al. 2024; Mat-
suki et al. 2024). Due to the unoriented nature of Gaussian
spheres, the camera pose rotation is governed solely by the
Jacobians of the alpha weights,
∂ω
∂TCW . These Jacobians ex-
hibit directional bias due to the anisotropic characteristics
of Gaussian spheres, which inherently constrains the cam-
era to move perpendicular to the equipotential surfaces of
the Gaussian function, as illustrated in Figure 3 left.
Unlike 3DGS, depth in 2D surfel splatting (Huang et al.
2024) is computed as the blending of ray-surfel intersection
points: D(x) = P
i
ωi ˆP(u(x))i, z, for which the gradient is
additionally influenced by the intersection-center residual:
∂D(x)
∂TCW = ∂D(x)
∂ωi,x
∂ωi,x
∂TCW +
∂D(x)
∂ˆP(u(x))
∂ˆP(u(x))
∂TCW
= ∂D(x)
∂ωi,x
∂ωi,x
∂TCW +
∂D(x)
∂ˆP(u(x))
( ∂ˆpi
∂TCW +
∂ˆtr
∂TCW
| {z }
radial grad
)
(10)

<!-- page 5 -->
where ˆP(u(x)) denotes the transformed intersection point
between pixel ray and surfel plane, and ˆtr = R(usutu +
vsvtv) represents the vector from surfel center to ray-surfel
intersection point, satisfying the relation ˆP(u(x)) = ˆpi+ˆtr.
Compared to the alpha-blending-style depth rendering in
3DGS, the Jacobian of surfel-based depth rendering includes
an additional radial vector component, ˆtr. This component
is critical for locally optimizing the pixel ray, enabling it to
move closer to or farther from the surfel center by control-
ling the camera’s rotation, as illustrated in Figure 3 right.
From a statistical perspective, the radial gradient provided
by oriented surfels acts as a guidance mechanism for align-
ing the reconstructed surface with the ground-truth target
view. This gradient directly influences the camera’s orienta-
tion, encouraging the pose to rotate either perpendicular or
parallel to the underlying plane. As a result, our surfel-based
pose optimization exhibits remarkable tracking robustness
even with very few frame-to-frame overlap, demonstrating a
wide convergence basin and enabling stable motion tracking
under significant viewpoint variations.
Using the derived pose Jacobian, we iteratively optimize
the camera pose as new frames arrive, taking advantage of
the geometrically accurate representation provided by the
oriented surfels. Following RTG-SLAM (Peng et al. 2024),
we integrate the Iterative Closest Point (ICP) method (New-
combe et al. 2011) in S3LAM as an optional camera tracking
module for synthetic datasets, which utilizes high-fidelity
depth information.
Keyframing and Optimization Strategies. Our keyframing
strategy is based on the camera motion (Cao, Kobbelt, and
Hu 2018). The initial frame is added to the keyframe list,
and subsequent frames are designated as keyframes, if their
relative rotation exceeds a threshold δr or their relative trans-
lation surpasses δt. These newly identified keyframes are ap-
pended to the keyframe list.
The surfel map is optimized every M frames using the
most recent frames. Additionally, when a new keyframe
is added, the surfel map is optimized using the former
keyframes. After completing the entire SLAM procedure,
the surfel splatting map is further refined by optimizing with
all recorded keyframes, employing ten times the number of
keyframe iterations to achieve the final accuracy.
Experiments
Experimenal Settings
Datasets. We conducted experiments on three representa-
tive datasets: the synthetic Replica (Straub et al. 2019),
the real-world TUM-RGBD (Sturm et al. 2012) and Scan-
Net++ (Yeshwanth et al. 2023). 3D reconstruction experi-
ments are performed on the Replica dataset due to its avail-
ability of ground-truth reconstructed meshes. Pose estima-
tion experiments are conducted on all three datasets. For
ScanNet++, we selected four sequences: 8b5caf3398 (S0),
b20a261fdf (S1), and f34d532901 (S2), as S0 and trun-
cated S1 have been previously benchmarked in SLAM re-
search (Keetha et al. 2024).
Implementation Details. To implement our proposed
adaptive surface mapping and pose Jacobian algorithms, we
Figure 4: Qualitative results of color and depth render-
ing in S3LAM compared to representative 3DGS-based
methods. Our method exhibits fewer artifacts and clearer
borders in the rendered color and depth.
Figure 5: Qualitative results of 3D scene reconstruction
for the comparison of S3LAM and RTG-SLAM (Peng
et al. 2024). Our method produces smoother surfaces and
finer details in the reconstructed meshes.
revised the 2D Gaussian splatting CUDA code in (Huang
et al. 2024). For the coupled pose estimation algorithm, map
optimization was performed every 6 frames for 50 iterations,
and pose optimization involved 50 iterations on Replica. We
set the mapping hyper-parameters γD to 1.0, γN to 0.1, τ to
5E−6, δT to 0.5, δd and δc to 0.1. All experiments were per-
formed on a Platinum 8375C CPU with an RTX3090 GPU.
Baselines. We compare the performation of S3LAM with
(1) recent NeRF-based RGB-D SLAM methods: NICE-
SLAM (Zhu et al. 2022) and Point-SLAM (Sandstr¨om et al.
2023), and (2) state-of-the-art 3D Gaussian splatting-based
methods: Gaussian Splatting SLAM (MonoGS) (Matsuki
et al. 2024), SplaTAM (Keetha et al. 2024), and RTG-
SLAM (Peng et al. 2024). More additional experimental de-
tails are reported in the supplementary material.
Results
3D Scene Reconstruction. Following NICE-SLAM
(Zhu
et al. 2022), we evaluate different methods using the fol-
lowing metrics: accuracy (cm), precision (the proportion of
reconstructed points with an accuracy below 3cm, %), com-
pletion (cm), recall (the proportion of ground-truth points
with a completion below 3cm, %), F1-score, and L1 depth
error (cm). Consistent with NeRF-based SLAM methods,
we generate the scene mesh using the TSDF-Fusion algo-

<!-- page 6 -->
Table 1: Comparison of geometry accuracy on Replica.
The P and R represent precision and recall respectively. The
best metric is highlighted in bold, and the second-best met-
ric is underlined.
Method
Acc.↓
P.↑
Comp.↓
R.↑
F1↑
L1↓
NICE-SLAM (2022)
2.84
84.4
2.31
85.0
84.7
2.64
Point-SLAM (2023)
0.61
99.9
2.42
86.9
92.7
0.44
MonoGS (2024)
2.72
75.6
3.29
76.6
75.6
3.56
SplaTAM (2024)
2.88
73.9
3.57
71.7
72.8
0.70
RTG-SLAM(2024)
0.75
98.9
2.81
82.8
90.0
1.71
Ours
1.06
95.2
2.19
88.6
91.9
0.47
Table 2: Comparison on Run-time Performance. Metrics
are obtained from run-time evaluations on the Office0 se-
quence of the Replica dataset.
FPS ↑
Memory ↓
Model Size ↓
Point-SLAM(2023)
0.32
11189 MB
2864 MB
SplaTAM(2024)
0.34
10340 MB
310 MB
MonoGS(2024)
0.87
25716 MB
17.4 MB
RTG-SLAM(2024)
8.95
3444 MB
46.7 MB
Ours
8.12
4200 MB
43.2 MB
rithm (Curless and Levoy 1996) after processing the RGB-D
input sequence for S3LAM and MonoGS. For RTG-SLAM
and SplaTAM, we adopt their densification method to create
the scene’s point cloud as in (Peng et al. 2024).
The experimental results are summarized in Table 1. Our
method achieves state-of-the-art performance in 3D scene
reconstruction by balancing precision and recall. This bal-
ance ensures that the reconstructed meshes are not only
densely populated but also closely aligned with ground-
truth vertices. By combining Gaussian surfel representations
with our novel adaptive mapping strategy, S3LAM achieves
highly accurate depth estimation from rendered maps, sig-
nificantly enhancing the overall SLAM performance. Quan-
titative evaluations in Table 1 demonstrate that S3LAM out-
performs 3DGS-based SLAM systems while achieving re-
construction quality comparable to that of leading NeRF-
based SLAMs. Notably, as shown in Table 2, S3LAM has
substantial advantages in both computational efficiency and
memory consumption compared to the NeRF-based SLAM.
We also conduct a qualitative comparison on image ren-
dering, depth rendering, and mesh reconstruction, as shown
in Figures 4 and 5. In both rendered image and depth maps,
S3LAM generates significantly fewer artifacts compared to
representative 3DGS-based SLAMs. In mesh reconstruc-
tion, the results of S3LAM produces more detailed object
boundaries and smoother scene surfaces, underscoring the
geometric accuracy of S3LAM.
Pose Tracking. We evaluate baseline methods and our two
pose tracking strategies on the Replica dataset. The experi-
mental results are summarized in Table 3. In S3LAM, we re-
fer to the method pose tracking with surfel splatting and the
ICP-based tracking as Ours-Coupled and Ours-ICP, re-
spectively. On the Replica dataset, due to high-quality depth
data and small pose variations, the ICP method achieves very
Figure 6: Qualitative ablation results: Depth recon-
struction without the adaptive strategy using mean depth
(Left), with our proposed distortion-based adaptive strategy
(middle), and the ground-truth depth (right).
Seq1
Seq2
Seq3
MonoGS
0.72
0.46
0.55
Ours
0.97
0.77
1.00
Figure 7: Comparison on convergence basin (left) and
tracking converging rate (right).
good performance. Compared to other coupled methods us-
ing Gaussian gradients, our surfel-based tracking method
demonstrates superior performance.
For the TUM-RGBD and ScanNet++ datasets, where
depth images are noisy and inter-frame motions can be
large, we use only the coupled surfel-based tracking with-
out ICP, as it offers better convergence and smaller drift.
The results on the TUM-RGBD dataset are shown in Table
4. It is worth noting that the significant noise and incom-
pleteness of depth data in TUM-RGBD have small impact
on MonoGS (2024), which primarily relies on color infor-
mation. On the other hand, our method outperforms other
NeRF-based and 3DGS-based RGB-D SLAM methods, and
achieves competitive performance with MonoGS (2024).
The tracking results on the ScanNet++ dataset are shown
in Table 5. ScanNet++ features abrupt teleportations and ro-
tations in its trajectories, causing many methods to either fail
to track camera motion or track only partial camera motion.
SplaTAM (Keetha et al. 2024) was originally tested on S0
and truncated S1 from the 0-th frame to the 360-th frame,
due to intense relative movement in the subsequent frames.
In contrast, our method demonstrates robust tracking con-
vergence even when adjacent frames exhibit very small over-
lap, achieving state-of-the-art performance. For example, in
S1 between frames 363 and 364, where a significant rotation
causes other methods to fail, our method successfully tracks
the large viewpoint change. Thanks to our proposed surfel-
based pose optimization, S3LAM successfully converges to
the correct pose, which is achieved through the Jacobian for-
mulation of the oriented surfels, as derived in our pose track-
ing method. In the next section, a detailed analysis of the
tracking convergence is provided.
Convergence Basin Analysis
We follow (Mitra et al. 2004; Matsuki et al. 2024) to evaluate
pose convergence. To simulate SLAM’s limited perception,
we train the scene using only a restricted 3×3 grid of views
with 0.1m spacing. We sample initial camera positions from

<!-- page 7 -->
Table 3: Comparison of tracking performance on Replica with ATE (unit: cm). * denotes SLAMs utilizing ICP for tracking.
Method
Rm 0
Rm 1
Rm 2
Off 0
Off 1
Off 2
Off 3
Off 4
Avg.
NICE-SLAM(2022)
0.97
1.31
1.07
0.88
1.00
1.10
1.10
1.13
1.06
Point-SLAM(2023)
0.54
0.43
0.34
0.36
0.45
0.44
0.63
0.72
0.49
SplaTAM(2024)
0.47
0.42
0.32
0.46
0.24
0.28
0.39
0.56
0.39
MonoGS(2024)
0.64
0.34
0.37
0.47
0.66
0.25
0.16
2.36
0.66
RTG-SLAM(2024)*
0.20
0.18
0.13
0.22
0.12
0.22
0.20
0.19
0.18
Ours-ICP*
0.19
0.18
0.11
0.18
0.13
0.29
0.17
0.22
0.21
Ours-Coupled
0.29
0.68
0.39
0.22
0.15
0.48
0.46
0.35
0.38
Table 4: Comparison of tracking performance on TUM-
RGBD with ATE (unit: cm).
Methods
fr1/desk
fr2/xyz
fr3/office
Avg.
NICE-SLAM (2022)
4.26
6.19
6.87
5.77
Point-SLAM (2023)
4.34
1.31
3.48
3.04
SplaTAM (2024)
3.35
1.24
5.16
3.25
MonoGS (2024)
1.52
1.58
1.65
1.58
Ours
2.38
1.16
2.26
1.93
Table 5: Comparison of tracking performance on Scan-
Net++ with ATE (unit: cm). The S1* denotes the truncated
sequence for S1.
Methods
S0
S1*
S1
S2
Point-SLAM(2023)
411.9
1000.8
829.4
1888.4
MonoGS(2024)
141.5
106.9
122.7
147.7
SplaTAM(2024)
0.63
1.90
70.93
2.05
Ours
0.35
0.42
0.51
1.11
0.2m to 1.6m from the target view (center view of training
data) and run 1,000 pose optimization steps using the RGB
and depth of the target view. We count the run as successful
if the final pose is within 1cm of the target.
We compare our method with a representative 3DGS-
based pose optimization (Matsuki et al. 2024) on three
Replica sequences. Figure 7 shows quantitative success
rates1 and the visualized convergence basins. Our method
achieves better convergence even when initial poses are far
from the target, with very small view overlap. This improved
behavior explains the strong tracking performance on Scan-
Net++, indicating that pose tracking with oriented surfel
primitives significantly expands the convergence basin un-
der large viewpoint changes.
Ablation Study
We conducted an ablation study to evaluate the impact of
distortion-adaptive rendering. The quantitative results are
presented in Table 6, comparing our method with 3D Gaus-
sian splatting, 2D Gaussian splatting reconstructions based
on mean depth and median depth strategies (Huang et al.
2024). Mapping with 3D Gaussian primitives yields subopti-
1Since MonoGS (Matsuki et al. 2024) does not specify exact
sequences, our selected sequences may yield different results.
Table 6: Ablation study for adaptive mapping.
Acc.↓
P.↑
Comp.↓
R.↑
F1↑
L1↓
3DGS
2.80
3.71
74.8
70.1
72.3
2.21
Mean
1.41
91.5
2.09
88.9
90.1
0.53
Median
1.10
94.7
2.35
87.1
90.6
0.71
Adaptive
1.06
95.2
2.19
88.6
91.9
0.47
Table 7: Ablation study comparing tracking accuracy
with ATE (unit: cm) on ScanNet++.
S0
S1*
S1
S2
w/o depth loss
162.5
138.5
168.4
150.1
w/o radial
224.0
331.4
567.2
200.8
Ours
0.68
1.21
1.43
1.69
mal depth estimation and reconstruction performance. Sim-
ilarly, without using depth distortion as a measure of map-
ping uncertainty, surfel splatting mapping also results in sub-
optimal reconstruction. Interestingly, reconstruction based
on mean depth achieves higher recall, while median depth
provides better precision. Our method, which combines av-
erage depth blending with dominant surfel-determined depth
rendering, successfully captures the benefits of both strate-
gies, achieving comparable precision and superior recall.
Qualitative results shown in Figure 6 further highlight the
degradation in reconstruction quality when distortion aware-
ness is omitted, underscoring the importance of incorporat-
ing depth distortion into the mapping process.
For the ablation of pose optimization, we evaluate perfor-
mance without the depth tracking loss and with the radial Ja-
cobian explicitly removed from the pose Jacobian on Scan-
Net++. The results in Table 7 validate that the whole pose
tracking design leads to better convergence and accuracy.
Conclusion
In this paper, we propose S3LAM, a novel SLAM system
that leverages 2D surfel splatting as its core representation
for mapping. By utilizing oriented 2D Gaussian surfels, our
method achieves superior surface reconstruction accuracy
and robust pose tracking capability, even in challenging sce-
narios. A current limitation is its degraded performance with
low-quality depth sensor inputs. In future work, we plan to
enhance our surfel-based mapping and tracking under noisy
sensor conditions.

<!-- page 8 -->
References
Barron, J. T.; Mildenhall, B.; Verbin, D.; Srinivasan, P. P.;
and Hedman, P. 2022. Mip-NeRF 360: Unbounded Anti-
Aliased Neural Radiance Fields.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 5470–5479. IEEE.
Cao, Y.-P.; Kobbelt, L.; and Hu, S.-M. 2018. Real-time high-
accuracy three-dimensional reconstruction with consumer
RGB-D cameras. ACM Transactions on Graphics (TOG),
37(5): 1–16.
Curless, B.; and Levoy, M. 1996. A volumetric method for
building complex models from range images. In Proceed-
ings of the 23rd annual conference on Computer graphics
and interactive techniques, 303–312.
Dai, A.; Nießner, M.; Zoll¨ofer, M.; Izadi, S.; and Theobalt,
C. 2017.
BundleFusion: Real-time Globally Consistent
3D Reconstruction using On-the-fly Surface Re-integration.
ACM Transactions on Graphics 2017 (TOG).
Dai, P.; Xu, J.; Xie, W.; Liu, X.; Wang, H.; and Xu, W. 2024.
High-quality surface reconstruction using gaussian surfels.
In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers, 1–11. ACM.
Davison, A. J.; Reid, I. D.; Molton, N. D.; and Stasse,
O. 2007. MonoSLAM: Real-Time Single Camera SLAM.
IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelli-
gence, 29(6): 1052–1067.
Hu, J.; Chen, X.; Feng, B.; Li, G.; Yang, L.; Bao, H.; Zhang,
G.; and Cui, Z. 2025. Cg-slam: Efficient dense rgb-d slam
in a consistent uncertainty-aware 3d gaussian field. In Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision, 93–112. Springer,
Springer.
Huang, B.; Yu, Z.; Chen, A.; Geiger, A.; and Gao, S. 2024.
2d gaussian splatting for geometrically accurate radiance
fields. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 conference papers, 1–11.
ACM.
Huang, J.; Huang, S.-S.; Song, H.; and Hu, S.-M. 2021. Di-
fusion: Online implicit 3d reconstruction with deep priors.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 8932–8941. Computer Vi-
sion Foundation / IEEE.
Keetha, N.; Karhade, J.; Jatavallabhula, K. M.; Yang, G.;
Scherer, S.; Ramanan, D.; and Luiten, J. 2024. SplaTAM:
Splat Track & Map 3D Gaussians for Dense RGB-D SLAM.
In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 21357–21366. IEEE.
Kerbl, B.; Kopanas, G.; Leimk¨uhler, T.; and Drettakis, G.
2023. 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time Radiance Field
Rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics, 42(4): 139–1.
Matsuki, H.; Murai, R.; Kelly, P. H.; and Davison, A. J.
2024.
Gaussian splatting slam.
In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 18039–18048.
Mildenhall, B.; Srinivasan, P. P.; Tancik, M.; Barron, J. T.;
Ramamoorthi, R.; and Ng, R. 2021.
Nerf: Representing
scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis. Com-
munications of the ACM, 65(1): 99–106.
Mitra, N. J.; Gelfand, N.; Pottmann, H.; and Guibas, L.
2004.
Registration of point cloud data from a geometric
optimization perspective. In Proceedings of the 2004 Eu-
rographics/ACM SIGGRAPH symposium on Geometry pro-
cessing, 22–31.
Newcombe, R. A.; Izadi, S.; Hilliges, O.; Molyneaux, D.;
Kim, D.; Davison, A. J.; Kohi, P.; Shotton, J.; Hodges, S.;
and Fitzgibbon, A. 2011.
KinectFusion: Real-time dense
surface mapping and tracking. In 2011 10th IEEE Interna-
tional Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, 127–
136.
Newcombe, R. A.; Lovegrove, S. J.; and Davison, A. J.
2011.
DTAM: Dense tracking and mapping in real-time.
In 2011 international conference on computer vision, 2320–
2327. IEEE, IEEE.
Peng, Z.; Shao, T.; Liu, Y.; Zhou, J.; Yang, Y.; Wang, J.; and
Zhou, K. 2024. Rtg-slam: Real-time 3d reconstruction at
scale using gaussian splatting. In ACM SIGGRAPH 2024
Conference Papers, 1–11.
Ruetz, F.; Hern´andez, E.; Pfeiffer, M.; Oleynikova, H.; Cox,
M.; Lowe, T.; and Borges, P. 2019. OVPC Mesh: 3D Free-
space Representation for Local Ground Vehicle Navigation.
In 2019 International Conference on Robotics and Automa-
tion (ICRA), 8648–8654. IEEE.
Sandstr¨om, E.; Li, Y.; Van Gool, L.; and Oswald, M. R.
2023. Point-slam: Dense neural point cloud-based slam. In
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision, 18433–18444. IEEE.
Sol`a, J.; Deray, J.; and Atchuthan, D. 2021. A micro Lie
theory for state estimation in robotics. arXiv:1812.01537.
Straub, J.; Whelan, T.; Ma, L.; Chen, Y.; Wijmans, E.;
Green, S.; Engel, J. J.; Mur-Artal, R.; Ren, C.; Verma, S.;
et al. 2019. The Replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor
spaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797.
Sturm, J.; Engelhard, N.; Endres, F.; Burgard, W.; and Cre-
mers, D. 2012. A benchmark for the evaluation of RGB-D
SLAM systems. In 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference
on intelligent robots and systems, 573–580. IEEE, IEEE.
Su, Y.; Chen, L.; Zhang, K.; Zhao, Z.; Hou, C.; and Yu, Z.
2025. GauS-SLAM: Dense RGB-D SLAM with Gaussian
Surfels. arXiv:2505.01934.
Sucar, E.; Liu, S.; Ortiz, J.; and Davison, A. J. 2021. imap:
Implicit mapping and positioning in real-time. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer
vision, 6229–6238. IEEE.
Sucar, E.; Wada, K.; and Davison, A. 2020. NodeSLAM:
Neural object descriptors for multi-view shape reconstruc-
tion. In 2020 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV),
949–958. IEEE.
Teed, Z.; and Deng, J. 2021. Droid-slam: Deep visual slam
for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. Advances in neu-
ral information processing systems, 34: 16558–16569.
Whelan, T.; Salas-Moreno, R. F.; Glocker, B.; Davison,
A. J.; and Leutenegger, S. 2016. ElasticFusion: Real-time
dense SLAM and light source estimation. The International
Journal of Robotics Research, 35(14): 1697–1716.

<!-- page 9 -->
Yan, C.; Qu, D.; Xu, D.; Zhao, B.; Wang, Z.; Wang, D.;
and Li, X. 2024. Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaus-
sian splatting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 19595–19604.
IEEE.
Yang, X.; Li, H.; Zhai, H.; Ming, Y.; Liu, Y.; and Zhang,
G. 2022. Vox-Fusion: Dense Tracking and Mapping with
Voxel-based Neural Implicit Representation. In 2022 IEEE
International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality
(ISMAR), 499–507. IEEE.
Yeshwanth, C.; Liu, Y.-C.; Nießner, M.; and Dai, A. 2023.
ScanNet++: A High-Fidelity Dataset of 3D Indoor Scenes.
In Proceedings of the International Conference on Com-
puter Vision (ICCV), 12–22. IEEE.
Zhi, S.; Bloesch, M.; Leutenegger, S.; and Davison, A. J.
2019. Scenecode: Monocular dense semantic reconstruction
using learned encoded scene representations. In Proceed-
ings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 11776–11785. IEEE.
Zhu, Z.; Peng, S.; Larsson, V.; Xu, W.; Bao, H.; Cui, Z.;
Oswald, M. R.; and Pollefeys, M. 2022. Nice-slam: Neu-
ral implicit scalable encoding for slam. In Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 12786–12796. IEEE.
