<!-- page 1 -->
OpenGS-Fusion: Open-Vocabulary Dense Mapping with Hybrid 3D
Gaussian Splatting for Refined Object-Level Understanding
Dianyi Yang1, Xihan Wang1, Yu Gao1, Shiyang Liu1, Bohan Ren1, Yufeng Yue1, Yi Yang∗,1
Abstract— Recent advancements in 3D scene understanding
have made significant strides in enabling interaction with
scenes using open-vocabulary queries, particularly for VR/AR
and robotic applications. Nevertheless, existing methods are
hindered by rigid offline pipelines and the inability to provide
precise 3D object-level understanding given open-ended queries.
In this paper, we present OpenGS-Fusion, an innovative open-
vocabulary dense mapping framework that improves seman-
tic modeling and refines object-level understanding. OpenGS-
Fusion combines 3D Gaussian representation with a Truncated
Signed Distance Field to facilitate lossless fusion of semantic fea-
tures on-the-fly. Furthermore, we introduce a novel multimodal
language-guided approach named MLLM-Assisted Adaptive
Thresholding, which refines the segmentation of 3D objects
by adaptively adjusting similarity thresholds, achieving an
improvement 17% in 3D mIoU compared to the fixed threshold
strategy. Extensive experiments demonstrate that our method
outperforms existing methods in 3D object understanding
and scene reconstruction quality, as well as showcasing its
effectiveness in language-guided scene interaction. The code is
available at https://young-bit.github.io/opengs-fusion.github.io/.
I. INTRODUCTION
Open-vocabulary scene understanding is critical for en-
abling various interaction tasks in real-world environments.
Recent studies [1]–[4] have shown that by projecting 2D
semantic information extracted from vision language models
(e.g., CLIP [5]) into 3D scene representations, users can
interact with scenes through open-vocabulary queries. This
capability is particularly beneficial for VR/AR [6], [7],
as well as for enhancing complex robotic tasks, including
navigation [8], [9] and object manipulation [10], [11].
A key factor in facilitating these tasks is the underlying
scene representation that bridges the gap between 2D and 3D.
It should enable timely updates with incoming data while
maintaining accurate geometric, appearance, and semantic
modeling. Traditional methods like point clouds [1], [9] and
voxel-based approaches [3], [16] integrate well with many
SLAM systems. However, they lack the ability to synthesize
novel views and struggle with high-fidelity reconstruction.
[17] Although NeRF-based methods [2], [18], [19] mitigated
these issues, they remain limited by fixed resolution and
inefficient per-pixel raycasting. [20]
Compared to NeRF, Gaussian splatting [21] exhibits sig-
nificant advantages in training efficiency and explicit scene
This work was partly supported by National Natural Science Foun-
dation of China (Grant No. NSFC 62233002) and National Key R&D
Program of China (2022YFC2603600). (*Corresponding Author: Y. Yang,
yang yi@bit.edu.cn)
1School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing,
China
Fig. 1.
Comparison of Model Architectures. Compared to 3DGS-feature-
field-based methods [12]–[15], our approach enables online modeling of
scene appearance, geometry, and semantics while supporting 3D object-
level queries. Our method enables versatile task-oriented interactions, such
as 3D object extraction and editing in an interactive manner. The results on
the left are from [12].
representation, making it highly suitable for scene under-
standing tasks. Therefore, numerous studies [12]–[15], [22],
[23] have explored incorporating semantic features into
Gaussian scene representation to construct a language fea-
ture field. Although these methods demonstrate impressive
performance in multi-view semantic understanding, several
limitations remain:
1) Rigid Offline Pipeline. These methods rely on essen-
tial preprocessing steps, such as pretraining 3D Gaussian
representation or offline compression of high-dimensional
semantic features. However, in real-world applications, for
example, robotic exploration and embodied interaction, mod-
els must support online perception. The inflexible pipeline of
these methods limits their scalability to these applications, as
any scene updates or new data necessitate retraining.
2) Limited 3D Object-Level Understanding. Most exist-
ing methods respond to textual queries by highlighting target
regions in 2D renderings from arbitrary viewpoints, lacking
the ability to provide precise 3D object models. Additionally,
these methods use a fixed threshold to filter irrelevant regions
during text query processing, which often fails to accurately
delineate object boundaries due to the contextual dependency
and ambiguity of semantic features.
To address these challenges, we propose OpenGS-Fusion,
a dense mapping framework for open-vocabulary object-
level scene understanding. 1) Online Scene Understanding:
OpenGS-Fusion extends cutting-edge GS-based mapping
system [24] by combining 3D Gaussian representations with
a Truncated Signed Distance Field (TSDF) [25]. The TSDF’s
voxel-based structure facilitates lossless fusion of semantic
arXiv:2508.01150v1  [cs.CV]  2 Aug 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
features and guides 3D Gaussian initialization, ensuring full
semantic preservation while significantly improving scene
update efficiency. 2) Refined 3D Object Understanding: To
achieve precise 3D object localization, we compute semantic
similarity across all spatial regions within the semantic
space. We further enhance this process with MLLM-Assisted
Adaptive Thresholding (AT-MLLM), a mechanism guided
by multimodal large language models [26]. By adaptively
adjusting thresholds based on semantic similarity, AT-MLLM
significantly improves object-level understanding accuracy,
achieving a 17% improvement in 3D mIoU.
In summary, our contributions are as follows.
• We introduce OpenGS-Fusion, an innovative open-
vocabulary dense mapping framework that leverages a
hybrid scene representation to concurrently construct
the appearance, geometry, and semantic features of a
scene in an online manner.
• We introduce a novel open-vocabulary query strategy
that leverages MLLM to adaptively adjust the similarity
threshold, thereby refining the final object localization.
• Extensive evaluations on various datasets demonstrate
our competitive performance in scene understanding and
reconstruction quality, as well as the effectiveness of
language-guided scene interaction.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Scene Dense Mapping System
Early dense mapping research focused on accurately rep-
resenting environments at both metric and topological lev-
els, emphasizing scene geometry and spatial relationships.
Recently, with advancements in radiation field techniques
[21], [27] and SLAM algorithms, scene representation has
shifted from pure geometry to an integration of appearance,
semantics, and localization. Gaussian splatting-based meth-
ods (e.g., LoopSplat [28], SplaTAM [17], MonoGS [29])
have shown strong potential in geometry and appearance
modeling, with some enabling real-time reconstruction (e.g.,
CG-SLAM [30], GS-Fusion [31], GSICP-SLAM [24]). Other
works (e.g., SGS-SLAM [32], SemGaussian-SLAM [33])
incorporate semantics for high-quality mapping but rely on
annotated datasets and fixed semantic categories, limiting
real-world applicability. In this paper, we leverage existing
2D foundation models without additional training, enabling
dense semantic mapping in open-world scenarios.
B. Open-Vocabulary Scene Understanding Methods
Recent advancements in Visual Language Foundation
Models (VLFMs), such as CLIP [5], RegionClip [34], and
MaskClip [35], have driven efforts to lift 2D semantic
knowledge into 3D for richer scene understanding and in-
teraction. Methods like OpenScene [36], Clip-Fields [9],
Open3DIS [37], and ConceptFusion [1] integrate geometric
and semantic information into point clouds, enabling 3D
scene perception but at a high storage cost. Open-Fusion [3]
and Uni-Fusion [16] address this by incorporating voxelized
CLIP features and supporting online scene understanding, but
their geometric and appearance accuracy is highly sensitive
to voxel resolution. 3D-OVS [18] is the first to use NeRF for
semantic modeling in open scenes, while LERF [2] and OV-
NeRF [38] improve the accuracy and consistency of semantic
field learning. Their subsequent work, LEGS [20] and OV-
Mapping [39], extend these methods to online scenes through
frame-by-frame fusion. However, all of these methods store
semantic information in NeRF, which is prone to catastrophic
forgetting in large-scale scenes. [20]
Concurrently, methods based on Gaussian feature fields
including Feature-3DGS [14], LEGaussian [13], FMGS [15],
FastLGS [40], TiGER [22], CLIP-GS [23], and LangSplat
[12], compress 2D CLIP features onto 3D Gaussian primi-
tives, facilitating high-precision pixel-level scene understand-
ing from any viewpoint via multi-view learning. Never-
theless, they lack semantic localization capabilities for 3D
objects. OpenGaussian [4] and EgoFilter [41] attempt to
address this through 3D instance segmentation. However,
such a strategy is inefficient and heavily dependent on 3D
segmentation accuracy, limiting their scene understanding
capacity. Furthermore, all of these methods are limited to
offline learning, making them unsuitable for applications
that require online updates, such as robot navigation or
interactive tasks. In this paper, we combine the hybrid scene
representation TSDF-3DGS to simultaneously model the
appearance, geometry, and semantic features of the scene
in an online, segmentation-free manner. Additionally, our
method supports precise 3D object-level localization given
natural language queries.
III. OPENGS-FUSION
An overview of our system is shown in Fig.2. Receiv-
ing continuous T RGB-D frames of color images Ct ∈
RH×W ×3 and depth images Dt ∈RH×W with poses Pt ∈
R4×4. We first extract 2D semantic features St following the
methodology described in Sec.III-A. Subsequently, the tuple
{Ct, Dt, St, Pt} is used to update our hybrid scene repre-
sentation M (Sec.III-B), following the approach in Sec.III-
C. Throughout the mapping process, users can leverage our
AT-MLLM module (Sec.III-D) to perform open-vocabulary
queries, enabling the localization of 3D objects of interest
and high-quality multi-view rendering.
A. 2D Language Embeddings Extractor
We adopt a methodology similar to [1], [4], [12] for
extracting language embeddings. Given the RGB image Ct
from the current view at time t, we first employ a SAM-like
model [42], [43] to extract a set of region proposals R. By
inputting these proposals into the CLIP model, we can extract
region-level semantic features, where all pixels within region
Ri share a unified language embeddings ei and confidence
ci. During pixel-level feature querying, the semantic embed-
dings of each pixel is directly assigned as the embeddings
of its corresponding region. Compared to methods [20], [39]
that directly output 2D semantic features without using 2D
segmentation models, our approach improves the consistency
of CLIP features across multiple views by using SAM.

<!-- page 3 -->
Fig. 2.
Overview of OpenGS-Fusion. Receiving RGB-D input with 2D language embeddings extracted from 2D foundation models, we simultaneously
update the appearance, geometry and semantic features of our hybrid 3D Gaussian scene representation. Additionally, the proposed open-vocabulary query
strategy enables precise localization of 3D objects without the need for explicit scene segmentation.
B. Hybrid 3DGS Scene Representation
In general, we represent unknown scenes using an
OpenVDB-based TSDF and a 3DGS scene representation.
OpenVDB [25] is a data structure designed to manipulate
unbounded volumetric data, enabling efficient CPU-based
operations. It supports flexible data types, such as TSDF
and occupancy grids. We adopt TSDF for its ability to
perform global geometric perception and integrate 3D se-
mantic embeddings in an efficient manner. Specifically, we
configure it as a single resolution grid, where each voxel v
stores a truncated signed distance value ϕ(v) to the nearest
surface, with ϕ(v) ≤0 indicating the voxels located behind
the surface. However, TSDF alone cannot capture fine local
details or support high-fidelity novel view synthesis.
Therefore, 3DGS is also chosen as the scene representation
because it is differentiable and can be easily projected
into 3D space to enable novel view synthesis. A Gaussian
primitive can be seen as an ellipsoid, parameterized by 3D
center position x, covariance matrix Σ, opacity o and color
h. During rendering, Gaussian primitives are sorted by depth
and projected from 3D space onto the 2D image plane using
the camera pose Pt = {R, t}. The covariance matrix Σ is
transformed into the 2D plane as:
Σ′ = JT−1ΣT−T JT ,
(1)
where J represents the Jacobian of the projection function.
The color ˆC(p) and depth ˆD(p) of each pixel p are then
computed using alpha-blending, as defined by:
ˆC(p) =
X
i∈N
hiαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj), ˆD(p) =
X
i∈N
diαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)
(2)
where hi and di represent the color and depth of the i-th
Gaussian primitive, respectively.
In summary, our hybrid scene representation is defined as
a set of sparse voxels V = {vj}Nv
j=1, where each voxel vj
contains the tuple {ωj, ϕj, cj, Gj, fj}. Here, ωj denotes the
weight, ϕj is the TSDF value, cj represents the semantic
confidence, Gj = {gk}M
k=1 is the set of Gaussian primitives
and fj is the semantic embedding within the voxel. This
hybrid representation leverages the complementary strengths
of TSDF and 3DGS. The TSDF provides global structural
guidance for initializing Gaussian primitives and stores im-
plicit semantic features, while 3DGS enhances the represen-
tation of fine local details and enables high-fidelity multi-
view rendering. Further details are discussed in the following
section.
C. Open-Vocabulary Dense Scene Mapping
Given input {Ct, Dt, St, Pt}, we update the global map
M in three stages. First, it performs TSDF fusion to update
the necessary voxels and capture the global scene geometry.
We then densify M with Gaussian primitives within highly
occupied voxels to enhance scene representation while updat-
ing semantic embeddings. Finally, we incorporate our scene
optimization strategy to refine the overall mapping quality
in real time. Notably, all input frames participate in the
TSDF Fusion process. However, to improve efficiency, the
densification and semantic updates processes are executed
only when the current frame is identified as a keyframe. We
adopt the same keyframe selection strategy as [24], which
will not be detailed here.
1) VDB-Based TSDF Fusion: We adopt the VDBFusion
[25] approach to perform TSDF fusion and update the current
volumetric map represented by a VDB volume. We first

<!-- page 4 -->
downsample the input Dt and transform the sampled points
into a set of rays R = {r1, ...rN} based on the current pose
Pt. Subsequently, we feed these rays into the Differential
Digital Analyzer (DDA) provided by the OpenVDB library
to obtain all voxels that need updating. Following the original
implementation [25], we then calculate the new TSDF value
for each voxel vk and update the final TSDF value ϕk and
the new weight ωk accordingly. Mathematically:
ωk = min(ωmax, ωk−1 + 1),
ϕk = ϕk−1ωk−1 + ϕωk
ωk−1 + ωk
(3)
where ωmax is an upper limit of weights.
2) Gaussian Densification and Semantic Fusion:
For
each keyframe, we initialize our GS primitives using the
downsampled points from the previous procedure. Unlike
methods that use fixed parameters for initialization [17],
[29], [31], we adopt a G-ICP based initialization method
following [24]. Each point xi is transformed into a Gaus-
sian distribution {xi, Σi} during the G-ICP process. This
distribution is then merged with the point’s color hi and
opacity o = 0.5 to form an initial GS primitive added to the
scene. This approach allows our method to obtain a relatively
accurate geometric representation at the initialization stage,
reducing the optimization cost. Furthermore, in order to
enhance robustness against noise and reduce unnecessary
GS primitives, we check whether the TSDF value ϕk of the
voxel where each GS resides exceeds a certain threshold γ
and whether there are no overlaps with other GS primitives.
Only when both conditions are met will it be added to the
global map. Notably, the voxel vj of each Gaussian can be
queried through the previously mentioned DDA.
Furthermore, for each initialized Gaussian gi, since it
is projected from the Ct, we can obtain its pixel-level
embeddings ei and confidence ci. Subsequently, we perform
semantic feature fusion based on TSDF as follows:
¯fj = ¯cj ¯fj + cifi
¯cj + ci
,
¯cj = ¯cj + ci
(4)
where ¯fj and ¯cj represent the semantic feature and confi-
dence of the voxel vj in which gi resides.
3) Scene Optimization Strategy: To supervise the learning
of our Gaussian representation, we apply the same loss
function as described in [24]. Furthermore, after introducing
each keyframe, we evaluate the TSDF value of every voxel
and prune all GS primitives within voxels where the TSDF
value is less than θ. This further enhances the efficiency of
scene optimization and robustness against noise.
D.
MLLM-Assisted Adaptive Thresholding
At any time t, given a natural language query Q containing
object names, our objective is to extract the corresponding
Gaussian primitives from M. Unlike methods [12], [13],
[15], [41] that focus on locating target objects in 2D ren-
dered images, our approach inherently ensures multi-view
Fig. 3.
A visual demonstration of our proposed AT-MLLM. This strategy
enables the precise localization of multiple objects in 3D space through
multi-stage threshold adjustment assisted by MLLM.
consistency of the final results by directly operating in the
3D space.
We first input Q into the CLIP model to extract text
features, which are then compared with semantic features
F of all global voxels V using cosine similarity. This GPU-
accelerated process typically completes in milliseconds. Af-
ter obtaining the similarities Sim, a threshold δ is applied
to filter the relevant voxels, and all GS points within these
voxels. However, existing methods [1], [12]–[15], [20] typ-
ically rely on a fixed threshold for filtering, regardless of
whether the data is in 2D or 3D. This approach often results
in ambiguous object boundaries and challenges in accurately
locating spatial objects.
Therefore, we propose an adaptive threshold adjustment
strategy assisted by MLLM, where MLLM refers to large
vision language models that support both image and text
inputs. As shown in Fig.3, the strategy includes four stages.
Stage1: Assuming all the Sim values have been mapped
to the range [0, 1], we initially set a high threshold δ1 for
filtering, aiming to select the Gaussians set G1 that are highly
related to the query. Subsequently, we treat G1 as a point
cloud and apply DBSCAN [44] to remove noise points and
obtain multiple clusters B, considering that there may be
multiple objects matching Q in the scene.
Stage2:
For each cluster Bl, we search for u queried
frames Wl from the keyframes based on the shortest distance
and the highest visual coverage. The evaluation score for
keyframe w is defined as:
E(Bl, w) =
Cov(w)
d(Bl, w) + ϵ
(5)
where d(·) represents the spatial distance between the cluster
center and the keyframe, and Cov(·) denotes the visual
coverage of the cluster in w.
Stage3: We initialize a threshold window TW = [0.5, 1]
and uniformly sample five thresholds within this range. For
each threshold δq, we use it to filter the scene primitives, and
render a corresponding set of images under Wl for cluster
Bl using Gaussian Splatting.
Stage4: These images are fed into the MLLM for evalu-
ation, along with a prompt that contains the user’s query Q.
The MLLM evaluates the results rendered from each queried
frame at the above thresholds to find the best threshold for

<!-- page 5 -->
Fig. 4.
Qualitative comparison of open-vocabulary 3D understanding on
ScanNet (top two rows) and Replica (last two rows), benchmarking 3DGS-
based methods (OpenGaussian [4] and LangSplat [12]).
each w in Wl. By aggregating the results of all frames, we
determine the optimal threshold ˆδ. Finally, we adjust the
window TW = [ˆδ −ξ, ˆδ + ξ] and return to Stage3.
After 2-3 iterations, we can obtain the final threshold and
the corresponding GS primitives. We demonstrate in Sec.IV-
D that this strategy significantly improves object segmenta-
tion accuracy compared to the fixed-threshold strategy.
IV. EXPERIMENT
Given an RGB-D video stream, our method enables online
scene semantic understanding and high-fidelity map recon-
struction. To comprehensively evaluate its performance, we
conducted extensive experiments focusing on 3D object-level
scene comprehension (Sec. IV-A) and dense reconstruction
(Sec. IV-B) capabilities. Furthermore, we demonstrate how
the model assists users in language-guided scene editing
(Sec. IV-C). Finally, we implement and validate the proposed
algorithm in real-world scenarios using our robotic mobile
platform (Sec. IV-E).
A. 3D Open-Vocabulary Scene Understanding.
Settings. 1) Task: Given an open-ended object-level textual
query, we compute the cosine similarity between the query
features and the 3D primitive features. Based on similar-
ity scores, we select the most relevant 3D primitives and
quantitatively compare them with the ground-truth 3D object
segmentation
2) Baselines: We compare our method with 3DGS-based
approaches, including LangSplat [12] and OpenGaussian
[4], as well as points-based scene understanding methods
ConceptFusion [1] and ConceptGraphs [45]. Following [4],
we extend LangSplat by reconstructing high-dimensional
CLIP features from low-dimensional semantic features to
perform 3D scene understanding. To ensure fairness, we
adhere to [4] for training LangSplat, OpenGaussian, and
our method, without optimizing the positional attributes of
Gaussian primitives.
TABLE I
3D OPEN-VOCABULARY SEGMENTATION BENCHMARK.
Replica
ScanNet
Methods
mAcc↑
mIoU↑
FPS↑
mAcc↑
mIoU↑
FPS↑
ConceptFusion*
28.02
11.49
0.49
21.22
10.64
0.52
ConceptGraphs
38.21
18.16
-
44.28
23.94
-
LangSplat
10.32
4.17
-
8.18
2.93
-
OpenGaussian
44.28
26.39
-
42.76
25.01
-
Ours*
49.19
35.88
1.02
58.29
37.23
1.22
* denotes methods running online
3) Datasets: The experiments were carried out on 8 Replica
[46] scenes and 10 real-world scenes from ScanNetV2 [47],
each of which provides RGB-D images, pose information,
and 3D segmentation annotations. Point initialization for the
offline methods is derived from the original datasets.
4) Evaluation Metrics: We consider all foreground objects
in each scene as potential text queries and compute the
3D Intersection-over-Union (IoU) for individual class. We
aggregate these measurements into dataset-level evaluation
metrics, specifically mean IoU (mIoU) and mean accuracy
(mAcc). Notably, unlike [4], which requires inputting all ob-
ject categories at once and assigning each Gaussian primitive
to the most relevant class, our method processes a single
query at a time and generates segmentation results of the
query. We argue that this approach better aligns with real-
world applications.
Results. In Table I, we present the quantitative metrics
of all methods on two datasets. Our method achieves the
best performance in both open-vocabulary 3D object seg-
mentation accuracy and training efficiency. Specifically, our
method outperforms the state-of-the-art 3DGS-based ap-
proach, OpenGaussian, with improvements of 9.5% (Replica)
and 12.2% (ScanNet) in terms of mIoU performance, while
operating in an online setting without the need for explicit
scene segmentation. In comparison to point-cloud-based
ConceptFusion, our method shows a significant improvement
of over 20% in mIoU in both datasets. We attribute this to the
adaptive thresholding capability of our advanced AT-MLLM
algorithm, whereas Conceptfusion employs a fixed threshold.
In Fig.4, we present the qualitative metrics of our method
across four scenes. As shown, since LangSplat only focuses
on 2D rendering of objects from arbitrary viewpoints, its
performance drops significantly when recovering semantic
information into 3D space. While OpenGaussian enhances
3D understanding through 3D instance segmentation and se-
mantic labeling but sacrifices granularity in open-vocabulary
queries. For example, when querying for ”Bins” in a scene
with two bins (third row). OpenGaussian fails to locate both
instances as they are segmented into separate entities, and
the model by default only retrieves the instance that best
matches the query. Additionally, conveying quantitative ob-
ject information in robotic interactions remains challenging.
B. Dense Scene Mapping
Settings. 1) Task: Given a posed RGB-D stream, our method
can perform high-fidelity dense scene mapping. This task
aims to evaluate the quality of geometric and appearance

<!-- page 6 -->
Fig. 5.
Qualitative rendering results from training views on the ScanNet dataset. Zoom in for a clearer view. * denotes that the method employs a hybrid
scene representation. All methods in this comparison utilize ground-truth poses.
TABLE II
QUANTITATIVE TRAIN VIEW RENDERING PERFORMANCE ON SCANNET.
(AVERAGE PERFORMANCE ON 6 SCENES)
Method
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 ↓
FPS ↑
MonoGS
17.31
0.636
0.583
21.30
14.02
RTG-SLAM
18.22
0.741
0.537
17.19
18.11
Splatam
19.91
0.747
0.312
14.01
1.79
GS-Fusion
21.51
0.774
0.251
-
24.68
GSICP-SLAM
24.53
0.841
0.190
1.78
30.00
Ours (w/o sem)
25.88
0.842
0.181
1.62
23.80
reconstruction of the scene, as well as the overall recon-
struction efficiency. To ensure a fair comparison, we disable
the semantics-related modules in our method.
2) Baselines: We select state-of-the-art dense mapping
methods based on Gaussian splatting as comparative base-
lines, including SplaTAM [17], MonoGS [29], RTG-SLAM
[48] and GSICP-SLAM [24]. Additionally, we include GS-
Fusion [31], which also utilizes a hybrid scene representa-
tion. For each method, we use their default parameters.
3) Datasets: The experiments are carried out on 8 synthetic
scenes from the Replica dataset and 6 real-world scenes from
the ScanNet dataset, following the setup of [17].
4) Evaluation Metrics: We employ three standard metrics
for rendering quality: PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. We also
evaluated geometric reconstruction accuracy with depth L1
loss and system efficiency with mapping frame rate (FPS).
Results. In Table III and Table II, we present the quanti-
tative reconstruction quality of our method in the Replica
and ScanNet datasets. Our method achieves state-of-the-art
performance in PSNR, SSIM, LPIPS, and Depth L1. In
particular, the scene understanding module of our method
is disabled in this evaluation, which explains the significant
speed improvement compared to Table I.
Compared to GS-Fusion, which initializes Gaussians with
fixed parameters in each voxel grid, our method leverages a
better initialization strategy that better captures the scene’s
geometric structure, leading to superior performance. Ad-
ditionally, compared to our code-based approach GSICP-
TABLE III
QUANTITATIVE TRAIN VIEW RENDERING PERFORMANCE ON REPLICA.
(AVERAGE PERFORMANCE ON 8 SCENES)
Method
PSNR ↑
SSIM ↑
LPIPS ↓
Depth L1 ↓
FPS ↑
MonoGS
36.50
0.960
0.070
0.77
4.691
RTG-SLAM
35.43
0.982
0.109
1.11
14.06
Splatam
34.98
0.972
0.088
0.82
0.38
GS-Fusion
34.78
0.948
0.055
-
18.41
GSICP-SLAM
38.34
0.975
0.041
0.58
30.02
Ours (w/o sem)
38.52
0.977
0.039
0.54
21.91
SLAM (the method upon which our work is developed), our
performance improvements on ScanNet are more pronounced
than on Replica. We attribute this to the incorporation of
our extra GS initialization and pruning mechanism, which
leverages the TSDF to improve robustness when handling
real-world scene data with depth noise.
Furthermore, Fig. 5 presents qualitative rendering results
in four real-world scenes, highlighting the robustness of our
method against motion blur and depth noise.
C. Language-guided scene editing
By integrating with large language models (LLMs) on
the front end, OpenGS-Fusion empowers users to execute
a diverse range of scene interaction tasks with enhanced
efficiency and accuracy. Consider a scenario where users
provide natural language instructions to manipulate objects
within a 3D environment. As illustrated in Fig. 6, the system
first identifies and localizes the referenced objects, then
sequentially executes spatial transformations such as reposi-
tioning, rotation, and object removal. This language-guided
editing framework facilitates precise and immersive scene
modifications, bridging the gap between human intentions
and automated spatial reasoning.
D. Ablation Experiments
To further validate our method, we conducted ablation
studies focusing on the core parameters of our hybrid rep-
resentation, specifically the voxel size of the TSDF and our
AT-MLLM module.

<!-- page 7 -->
Fig. 6.
An Example of Language-Guided Scene Editing. OpenGS-Fusion
accurately localizes objects in 3D space and efficiently executes language-
guided scene modifications. The spatial position of objects is represented
using a standardized format, encompassing nine dimensions, including
center position coordinates, dimensions (length, width, height), and rotation
angles.
The results are shown in Table IV. 1) Voxel Size: In our
method, the size of the voxel affects both the granularity of
the semantic space and the initialization process of Gaus-
sians. Reducing voxel size improves overall reconstruction
quality and scene understanding capabilities. 2) AT-MLLM
Module:
This module adaptively adjusts thresholds using
MLLM to filter out irrelevant primitives in the scene. Com-
pared to a fixed threshold strategy (set at 0.6), our AT-MLLM
module enhances the final scene understanding of mIoU by
17% (at 5 cm of voxel size).
TABLE IV
ABLATION STUDY ON SCANNET: ASSESSING RECONSTRUCTION
QUALITY WITH DATASETS FROM IV-A AND SCENE UNDERSTANDING
WITH DATASETS FROM IV-B
Voxel
size
Adaptive
Threshold
PSNR↑
SSIM↑
LPIPS↓
mIoU(%)
mAcc(%)
10cm
✗
24.57
0.841
0.177
14.26
23.50
✓
33.69
46.14
5cm
✗
25.88
0.842
0.181
19.77
34.81
✓
37.23
58.29
E. Real-World Experiments
In this section, we describe the practical implementation of
OpenGS-Fusion for the reconstruction and understanding of
indoor scenes using a mobile robotic device. Experiments
were conducted on the Diablo platform equipped with a
Fig. 7. Reconstruction and scene understanding results on our self-captured
dataset, demonstrated across three representative spatial locations.
RGB-D camera system and an NVIDIA Jetson AGX Orin.
The setup enables real-time image streaming and pose es-
timation via ORB-SLAM3. Our algorithm was deployed
on a computing setup with an NVIDIA RTX 4090 GPU
and an Intel Core i9-14900K CPU. To improve efficiency,
MobileSAMv2 [42] was used as the 2D segmentation model
in our 2D Embedding Extractor model, enabling real-time
image segmentation at more than 25 fps. Parallel processing
on the server achieved an overall operational efficiency of 4
fps. Following [29], [31], global optimization was performed
after mapping to provide more realistic synthesized results.
Figure 7 shows the final results of scene reconstruction and
object-level query within the scene.
V. CONCLUSIONS
We propose OpenGS-Fusion, an innovative dense mapping
framework for open-vocabulary 3D scene understanding. It
integrates 3D Gaussian representations with a Truncated
Signed Distance Field to fuse semantic information in an
online manner and enhance modeling capabilities. By com-
bining semantic features into the hybrid scene represen-
tation, our approach enables continuous scene modeling
while maintaining high-quality geometric and semantic fi-
delity. Additionally, we introduce MLLM-Assisted Adaptive
Thresholding, a novel mechanism that refines 3D object
localization by adaptively adjusting similarity thresholds
based on MLLM’s guidance. Through extensive evaluations,
we demonstrate that OpenGS-Fusion outperforms existing
methods in scene reconstruction quality and object-level
understanding, making it a strong candidate for real-world
interaction tasks in various environments. However, our
method currently relies on accurate pose estimation and faces
limitations in query efficiency. Future work will explore how
to leverage hybrid scene representation for pose estimation
and investigate lightweight MLLMs specifically designed for
image retrieval tasks to further enhance performance.
APPENDIX
In this section, we delve into the implementation details of
our method. For 2D feature extraction, we utilize SAM [43]
and the default CLIP [5] model in our experiments, following

<!-- page 8 -->
the approach adopted by other methods. For scene represen-
tation, we set the leaf voxel size of the VDB structure to 5cm
and the truncated value to 7cm. We adhere to the GS scene
representation settings outlined in [24]. For our AT-MLLM
method, we set the initial threshold δ1 = 0.8, select u = 3
keyframes, and use a threshold window ξ = 0.2 per iteration.
We set the MLLM as gpt-4o-mini, which requires an average
of 5 seconds per iteration. For mapping, we select a keyframe
every 10 frames on Replica and every 8 frames on ScanNet.
During optimization, frames are randomly selected from the
keyframes window.
REFERENCES
[1] K. Jatavallabhula, et al., “Conceptfusion: Open-set multimodal 3d
mapping,” in Proc. of Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS), 2023.
[2] J. Kerr, et al., “Lerf: Language embedded radiance fields,” in Proc. of
International Conference on Computer Vision (ICCV), 2023.
[3] K. Yamazaki, et al., “Open-fusion: Real-time open-vocabulary 3d
mapping and queryable scene representation,” in Proc. of IEEE Inter-
national Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 9411–
9417, 2024.
[4] Y. Wu, et al., “Opengaussian: Towards point-level 3d gaussian-based
open vocabulary understanding,” in Proc. of Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, 2024.
[5] A. Radford, et al., “Learning transferable visual models from natural
language supervision,” in Proc. of International Conference on Ma-
chine Learning (ICML), 2021.
[6] M. Ye, et al., “Gaussian grouping: Segment and edit anything in
3d scenes,” in Proc. of European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), 2024.
[7] Y. Jiang, et al., “Vr-gs: A physical dynamics-aware interactive gaus-
sian splatting system in virtual reality,” in Proc. of ACM SIGGRAPH
2024 Conference Papers, 2024.
[8] C. Huang, et al., “Visual language maps for robot navigation,” in
Proc. of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA), pp. 10 608–10 615, 2023.
[9] N. M. M. Shafiullah, et al., “Clip-fields: Weakly supervised semantic
fields for robotic memory,” arXiv preprint arXiv: Arxiv-2210.05663,
2022.
[10] A. Rashid, et al., “Language embedded radiance fields for zero-shot
task-oriented grasping,” in Conference on Robot Learning (CoRL),
2023.
[11] Y. Zheng, et al., “Gaussiangrasper: 3d language gaussian splatting for
open-vocabulary robotic grasping,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09637,
2024.
[12] M. Qin, et al., “Langsplat: 3d language gaussian splatting,” in Proc. of
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), pp. 20 051–20 060, 2024.
[13] J.-C. Shi, et al., “Language embedded 3d gaussians for open-
vocabulary scene understanding,” in Proc. of IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 5333–5343,
2024.
[14] S. Zzhou, et al., “Feature 3dgs: Supercharging 3d gaussian splatting to
enable distilled feature fields,” in Proc. of IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 21 676–21 685, 2024.
[15] X. Zuo, et al., “Fmgs: Foundation model embedded 3d gaussian
splatting for holistic 3d scene understanding,” Int. J. Comput. Vision,
vol. 133, no. 2, pp. 611–627, 2024.
[16] Y. Yuan, et al., “Uni-fusion: Universal continuous mapping,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 1373–1392, 2024.
[17] N. Keetha, et al., “Splatam: Splat, track and map 3d gaussians for
dense rgb-d slam,” in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024.
[18] K. Liu, et al., “Weakly supervised 3d open-vocabulary segmentation,”
in Proc. of Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 2023.
[19] Y. Bhalgat, et al., “N2f2: Hierarchical scene understanding with nested
neural feature fields,” in Proc. of European Conference on Computer
Vision (ECCV), pp. 197–214, 2024.
[20] J. Yu, et al., “Language-embedded gaussian splats (legs): Incremen-
tally building room-scale representations with a mobile robot,” in 2024
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 13 326–13 332, 2024.
[21] B. Kerbl, et al., “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field
rendering,” ACM Transactions on Graphics, vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–14,
2023.
[22] T. Xu, et al., “Tiger: Text-instructed 3d gaussian retrieval and coherent
editing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.14455, 2024.
[23] G. Liao, et al., “Clip-gs: Clip-informed gaussian splatting for real-
time and view-consistent 3d semantic understanding,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2404.14249, 2024.
[24] S. Ha, et al., “Rgbd gs-icp slam,” in Proc. of European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 180–197, 2024.
[25] I. Vizzo, et al., “Vdbfusion: Flexible and efficient tsdf integration of
range sensor data,” Sensors, vol. 22, no. 3, p. 1296, 2022.
[26] J.
Achiam,
et
al.,
“Gpt-4
technical
report,”
arXiv
preprint
arXiv:2303.08774, 2023.
[27] B. Mildenhall, et al., “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance
fields for view synthesis,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1,
pp. 99–106, 2021.
[28] L. Zhu, et al., “Loopsplat: Loop closure by registering 3d gaussian
splats,” in International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), 2025.
[29] H. Matsuki, et al., “Gaussian Splatting SLAM,” in Proc. of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024.
[30] J. Hu, et al., “Cg-slam: Efficient dense rgb-d slam in a consistent
uncertainty-aware 3d gaussian field,” in Proc. of the European Con-
ference on Computer Vision (ECCV), pp. 93–112, 2024.
[31] J. Wei, et al., “Gsfusion: Online rgb-d mapping where gaussian
splatting meets tsdf fusion,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
2024.
[32] M. Li, et al., “Sgs-slam: Semantic gaussian splatting for neural dense
slam,” in Proc. of the European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), pp. 163–179, 2024.
[33] S. Zhu, et al., “Semgauss-slam: Dense semantic gaussian splatting
slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.07494, 2024.
[34] Y. Zhong, et al., “Regionclip: Region-based language-image pretrain-
ing,” in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pp. 16 793–16 803, 2022.
[35] C. Zhou, et al., “Extract free dense labels from clip,” in Proc. of the
European Conference on Computer Vision (ECCV), 2022.
[36] S. Peng, et al., “Openscene: 3d scene understanding with open
vocabularies,” in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023.
[37] P. D. A. Nguyen, et al., “Open3dis: Open-vocabulary 3d instance
segmentation with 2d mask guidance,” in Proc. of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
2024.
[38] G. Liao, et al., “Ov-nerf: Open-vocabulary neural radiance fields with
vision and language foundation models for 3d semantic understand-
ing,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
vol. 34, no. 12, pp. 12 923–12 936, 2024.
[39] M. Tie, et al., “Ov-mapping: Online open-vocabulary mapping with
neural implicit representation,” in Proc. of the European Conference
on Computer Vision (ECCV), A. Leonardis, et al., Eds., 2025.
[40] Y. Ji, et al., “Fastlgs: Speeding up language embedded gaussians
with feature grid mapping,” in Proc. of AAAI Conference on Artificial
Intelligence, 2025.
[41] Q. Gu, et al., “Egolifter: Open-world 3d segmentation for egocentric
perception,” in Proc. of the European Conference on Computer Vision
(ECCV), pp. 382–400, Milan, Italy, 2024.
[42] C. Zhang, et al., “Mobilesamv2: Faster segment anything to every-
thing,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09579, 2023.
[43] A. Kirillov, et al., “Segment anything,” arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
[44] M. Ester, et al., “A density-based algorithm for discovering clusters in
large spatial databases with noise,” in Proc. of the Second International
Conference on Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining, pp. 226–231.
AAAI Press, 1996.
[45] Q. Gu, et al., “Conceptgraphs: Open-vocabulary 3d scene graphs for
perception and planning,” in Proc. of IEEE International Conference
on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 5021–5028, 2024.
[46] J. Straub, et al., “The Replica dataset: A digital replica of indoor
spaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019.
[47] A. Dai, et al., “Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d reconstructions of indoor
scenes,” in Proc. Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR),
IEEE, 2017.
[48] Z. Peng, et al., “Rtg-slam: Real-time 3d reconstruction at scale using
gaussian splatting,” 2024.
