<!-- page 1 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
1
Camera Pose Refinement via 3D Gaussian Splatting
Lulu Hao, Lipu Zhou, Member, IEEE, Zhenzhong Wei, Xu Wang
Abstract—Camera pose refinement aims at improving the ac-
curacy of initial pose estimation for applications in 3D computer
vision. Most refinement approaches rely on 2D-3D correspon-
dences with specific descriptors or dedicated networks, requiring
reconstructing the scene again for a different descriptor or fully
retraining the network for each scene. Some recent methods
instead infer pose from feature similarity, but their lack of
geometry constraints results in less accuracy. To overcome these
limitations, we propose a novel camera pose refinement frame-
work leveraging 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS), referred to as
GS-SMC. Given the widespread usage of 3DGS, our method can
employ an existing 3DGS model to render novel views, providing
a lightweight solution that can be directly applied to diverse
scenes without additional training or fine-tuning. Specifically,
we introduce an iterative optimization approach, which refines
the camera pose using epipolar geometric constraints among the
query and multiple rendered images. Our method allows flexibly
choosing feature extractors and matchers to establish these
constraints. Extensive empirical evaluations on the 7-Scenes and
the Cambridge Landmarks datasets demonstrate that our method
outperforms state-of-the-art camera pose refinement approaches,
achieving 53.3% and 56.9% reductions in median translation and
rotation errors on 7-Scenes, and 40.7% and 53.2% on Cambridge.
Index Terms—3D Gaussian Splatting, camera pose refinement,
multi-view constraints, visual localization.
I. INTRODUCTION
V
ISUAL localization, which estimates the six-degree-of-
freedom (6-DoF) camera pose of a query image within
a known scene, has a wide range of applications, including
Augmented/Virtual Reality (AR/VR) [1], [2], Simultaneous
Localization and Mapping (SLAM) [3], [4], and autonomous
navigation [5], [6]. Over the past decade, traditional structure-
based localization has represented scenes as sparse 3D point
clouds generated via Structure-from-Motion (SfM), retrieving
2D-3D correspondences from either handcrafted feature de-
scriptors [7], [8] or learned feature descriptors [9], [10]. Cam-
era pose is then estimated using the RANSAC-PnP algorithm
[11], [12]. However, these approaches are tied to the specific
descriptors used for scene reconstruction, which are inflexible
and incur significant storage overhead.
While structure-based methods rely on point clouds,
regression-based methods use neural networks represent
scenes implicitly. Scene Coordinate Regression (SCR) meth-
ods [13], [14], [15] predict the 3D coordinates of each image
pixel, which are computationally expensive and impractical
for large-scale or highly complex scenes. On the other hand,
Absolute Pose Regression (APR) methods [16], [17], [18],
[19] directly infer 6-DoF camera pose from the query image
through end-to-end networks. Although APR methods achieve
fast inference, their accuracy is highly dependent on the
training data. Moreover, their performance typically degrades
significantly under variations in illumination, viewpoint, or
scene appearance.
Considering the above challenges, camera pose refinement
provides a complementary approach to visual localization [20],
aiming to improve the accuracy of initial poses estimated by
approaches such as APR. While some methods [21], [22]
refine the camera pose by aligning deep features between
the query and reference images, they still depend on 2D-3D
correspondences obtained from SfM point clouds. Recently,
Neural Radiance Fields (NeRF) [23] have attracted significant
attention for their ability to provide an implicit representation
of 3D scenes. Early NeRF-based refinement methods [24], [25]
invert a NeRF model to iteratively optimize the camera pose
by aligning pixel-level intensities between the query and the
rendered image (i.e., rendered by the NeRF model from the
initial poses) using photometric error. Subsequent studies [26],
[27], [28] employ tailored deep features to align the query
image with the rendered image, but remain constrained by the
need to sample a single ray per pixel during NeRF rendering,
resulting in high computational cost. With the emergence of
3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [29], [30], [31], which offers
an explicit scene representation, researchers have increasingly
leveraged 3DGS for camera pose refinement. Current 3DGS-
based refiners either rely on dedicated neural networks that
learn scene-specific features for pose refinement [32], [33], or
follow structure-based pipelines that establish 2D-3D corre-
spondences using specific feature descriptors [34].
Despite their promising performance, these approaches are
limited by their reliance on either task-specific networks
or descriptor types. Recent approaches [35], [36] generate
multiple rendered images from perturbed poses and compute
feature-level similarity between the query and rendered images
to rank candidate poses, as shown in Fig. 1(a). However,
they often neglect geometric information critical for precise
pose refinement, limiting the potential of pre-trained features
in the pose refinement task. While a straightforward method
involves refining the camera pose using depth information
from the 3DGS map combined with feature matching and
the RANSAC-PnP algorithm, it exhibits shortcomings due to
reconstruction quality.
To this end, we propose a novel camera pose refinement
framework that iteratively refines the camera pose, named
GS-SMC. Our approach is applicable across diverse scenes
and is not tied to specific feature descriptors or dedicated
neural networks. We employ 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
for explicit scene representation and high-fidelity novel view
synthesis. The image rendered from the initial pose is defined
as the reference image, and the images rendered from per-
turbed poses generated by applying perturbations to the initial
0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2021 IEEE
arXiv:2508.17876v1  [cs.CV]  25 Aug 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
2
(a)
CrossFire [26]
DFNet [18]
+NeFeS [27]
DFNet [18]
+HR-APR [28]
McLoc [35]
DFNet [18]
+GS-SMC
Marepo [54]
+GS-SMC
0
2
4
6
8
0
1
2
3
Median Rotation error [°]
 Init Transl.   
 Refined Transl.
Median Translation error [cm]
 Init Rot.   
 Refined Rot.
(b)
Fig. 1. (a) Existing pose refinement methods that do not require training on
dedicated neural networks [35], [36], generally adopt an iterative framework
that utilizes feature-level similarity metrics to rank candidate poses. (b)
Average median translation and rotation errors on the 7-Scenes dataset, where
our method (GS-SMC) outperforms state-of-the-art approaches.
pose are defined as candidate images. Given these images
along with the query image, our approach allows flexible
choice of feature extractors and matchers to establish 2D-2D
correspondences. Based on these matches, we iteratively refine
the camera pose by computing the relative poses between
the query and rendered images, leveraging epipolar geometry
constraints. Additionally, our method can be seamlessly inte-
grated into existing pose estimation frameworks to improve
their localization performance further.
The main contributions of this paper are summarized as
follows:
• We propose a novel camera pose refinement framework
that iteratively optimizes camera pose by matching the
query image with novel views rendered from 3DGS. As
3DGS is widely adopted in 3D reconstruction and novel
view synthesis, we can directly utilize an existing 3DGS
model, providing a lightweight and adaptable solution for
diverse scenes.
• We introduce an iterative method that refines the initial
camera pose by estimating relative poses computed from
2D-2D correspondences between the query and rendered
images via epipolar geometry. Our approach supports
arbitrary feature extractors and matchers to establish
these correspondences, avoiding time-consuming repeat
reconstruction or full retraining per-scene networks.
• We conduct extensive evaluations on the 7-Scenes and
Cambridge Landmarks datasets. The results indicate that
our method significantly outperforms state-of-the-art re-
finement approaches, reducing the median translation and
rotation errors by 1.29 cm and 0.45◦on the 7-Scenes, and
by 0.11 m and 0.33◦on the Cambridge.
II. RELATED WORK
In this section, we first present a brief review of exist-
ing approaches related to visual localization, then discuss
recent advances in NeRF-based and 3DGS-based methods,
and finally focus on the camera pose refinement and image
alignment, which are most relevant to the proposed method.
A. Visual Localization
Traditional structure-based methods [8], [9], [37], [38] rely
on 2D-3D correspondences coupled with specific feature de-
scriptors (i.e., SIFT [39]). Subsequent works have developed
these structure-based techniques within deep-learning frame-
works, making the SfM pipeline robust [40], long-term [10],
and efficient [41]. Despite their superior performance, these
methods depend on a sparse point cloud and a specific feature
descriptor type, requiring repeated reconstruction for a new
scene or when changing descriptor type.
Furthermore, regression-based methods [42] have emerged
as an alternative to traditional methods that depend on sparse
point clouds. Scene Coordinate Regression (SCR) predicts
dense 3D coordinates for each image pixel and estimates
the camera pose using differentiable optimization [21], [43],
[44]. Specifically, DSAC [13] comprised two separate CNNs
to predict scene coordinates, followed by a differentiable
RANSAC algorithm for probabilistic hypothesis selection.
ACE [14] utilized a scene-independent feature backbone and
a scene-specific prediction head, yet still necessitates fine-
tuning for mapping. GLACE [15] integrated pre-trained global
and local encodings, implicitly grouping the reprojected con-
straints according to co-visibility. These methods demand
large amounts of training data and face challenges in large-
scale scenes. Alternatively, Absolute Pose Regression (APR)
predicts the camera pose directly from the query image
using an end-to-end neural network [45], [46], [47]. ATLoc
[16] and MS-Transformer [17] improved APR by extracting
salient feature points from feature maps and incorporating self-
attention mechanisms based on the Transformer architecture.
However, their accuracy largely also depends on the quantity
and quality of training data, and they often degrade under
varying illumination and viewpoints.
B. NeRF/3DGS-based Visual Localization
In recent years, novel view synthesis techniques have been
developed to improve localization performance. Neural Radi-
ance Fields (NeRF) represent scenes implicitly by modeling
the radiance field with neural networks [23], [48], [49].
Previous studies estimate pose by inverting pre-trained NeRF
models via pixel sampling [24], [50], [51]. Loc-NeRF [52]
and Lin et al. [25] employed Monte Carlo sampling to alleviate
convergence to local optima. Other methods advance Absolute
Pose Regression (APR) by incorporating synthetic views gen-
erated from NeRF as additional training data [18], [19]. Sub-
sequent approaches focus on modeling viewpoint-dependent
descriptors [53], dense self-supervised local features enriched

<!-- page 3 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
3
Fig. 2. Overview of the proposed GS-SMC camera pose refinement method. Given a query image and its initial pose from prior estimation, we generate a
set of pose hypotheses by applying perturbations to the initial pose and employ 3DGS to render images. We introduce a consistency strategy to refine the
pose by estimating the relative poses between the query image and the rendered images. To further improve robustness, epipolar geometry constraints are
introduced by minimizing the objective function L at each iteration. The refinement proceeds iteratively, with each output displaying the ground truth in the
bottom-left and the current prediction in the top-right.
with depth information [26], [28], and encoding 3D geometric
features [27]. However, these approaches demonstrate limited
scalability in large-scale scenarios. Recently, Marepo [54]
introduced a scene-agnostic pose regression method adaptable
to new map representations, though it still requires fine-tuning.
Although NeRF-based approaches advance visual local-
ization, they are challenged by the requirement to sample
a single ray per pixel. In contrast, 3D Gaussian Splatting
(3DGS), which explicitly represents scenes using numerous
3D Gaussian ellipsoids, has attracted significant attention [29],
[55], [30]. Early studies focus on inverting 3DGS models to
achieve accurate camera pose estimation [56], [32], [57], [58].
Zhou et al. [33] exploited photometric constraints and feature
correspondences for precise pose estimation. While these
early 3DGS-based approaches achieve notable pose estimation
accuracy, they often rely heavily on photometric consistency
and are sensitive to texture variations. More recently, NuRF
[59] proposed an adaptive nudged particle filter framework,
though it still faces challenges in texture-poor environments.
SplatLoc [60] introduced an unbiased 3D descriptor field for
Gaussian primitives, but still faces difficulties when scaling
to large outdoor scenes. Besides, SplatPose [61] combined
a dual-branch network with dense 2D-3D feature alignment,
addressing feature misalignment and depth errors.
While these methods achieve significant improvements, our
approach provides complementary and practical benefits for
visual localization by refining the initially estimated camera
poses. Additionally, by leveraging an existing pre-trained
3DGS model, it enables flexible adaptation to new scenes
without the need for fully retraining or fine-tuning.
C. Pose Refinement and Image Alignment
Pose refinement improves the accuracy of the initial pose
estimate through the iterative minimization of a carefully
designed objective function. Inspired by techniques widely
employed in Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM)
systems [3], [62], [63], direct alignment methods [21], [64],
[65] typically optimize pose estimation by aligning deep fea-
tures with image gradients extracted from the query image and
the current pose estimate, relying on the photometric constancy
assumption. In contrast, indirect alignment methods, which
rely on explicit feature matching, instead aim to minimize the
reprojection error [46], [66], [67], offering greater robustness.
Lately, NeRF/3DGS-based pose refinement methods have
demonstrated notable improvements. [25], [24], [50], [58]
performed gradient-based optimization by backpropagating the
photometric error and refining camera pose using the Adam
optimizer [68]. Alternatively, indirect alignment methods ei-
ther design tailored features [27], [53], [26], [28], [69] or
rely on specific descriptors [70], [34] to encode the mapping
between image features and camera pose. However, while the
former requires task-specific training, the latter depends on the
reconstruction pipeline, leading to limited practical applicabil-
ity. Recent research investigates whether task-specific training
for each scene is essential. One such method is Geo-Loc [36],
which ranks retrieved database images using off-the-shelf fea-
tures combined with a view-consistency-guided fusion module.
Likewise, MCLoc [35] integrated pre-trained features with a
particle filter framework to refine pose estimates iteratively.
Despite recent methods eliminate the need for training
specific feature extractors and scene representation by ranking
feature-level similarity, they remain limited in capturing geo-
metric information useful for visual localization. In contrast,
our method formulates camera pose refinement as a geometry-
guided multi-view constrained optimization, allowing flexible
selection of feature extractors and matchers.
III. METHODOLOGY
We propose a camera pose refinement framework, termed
GS-SMC, which leverages 3DGS to render novel views. In this
section, we first define the camera pose refinement problem
(Sec. III-A). Next, we present the multi-view consistency strat-
egy, which computes the refined pose by estimating the relative

<!-- page 4 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
4
Fig. 3. Illustration of multi-view constraints. In the first step, feature correspondences between the query image and rendered images are established based
on the assignment matrix. The second step introduces a multi-view consistency strategy by estimating the relative poses and their corresponding motion
relationships. In the third step, the camera pose is refined by minimizing the sum of distances from feature points to their corresponding epipolar lines.
poses between the query image and the rendered images (Sec.
III-B). Finally, we introduce an epipolar geometry-constrained
pose optimization approach, which further reduces the impact
of mismatches in each refinement iteration (Sec. III-C).
A. Problem Formulation
Since most visual localization and 3D reconstruction meth-
ods utilize 3DGS as the scene representation, our method can
directly leverage an existing 3DGS model for pose refinement
without additional full retraining or fine-tuning. In 3DGS,
the scene is characterized by a dense set of anisotropic 3D
Gaussians G (µ, Σ, c (d) , α), where center position µ ∈R3,
symmetric covariance matrix Σ ∈R3×3, spherical harmonics
c (d) related to view direction d, and opacity α ∈R1. Let
o ∈R3 represent the center of the camera optical, the RGB
color of each pixel I(o, d) on the image plane is computed
by the alpha-blending formula.
Therefore, this paper focuses on refining the camera pose
with a query image Iq, a known camera pose T ∈SE (3),
and a trained 3D representation of the scene parameterized
by G with known camera intrinsic matrix K. A straight-
forward approach could leverage 3DGS to render images
and aligned depth maps, followed by establishing 2D-3D
correspondences through feature matching for pose refinement
using the RANSAC-PnP algorithm. However, the accuracy of
this method is highly dependent on the quality of the 3DGS
model and the robustness of feature matching, which signifi-
cantly impacts the reliability of the derived depth information.
Consequently, we formulate pose refinement as an opti-
mization problem that computes the pose of the query image
from estimated the relative poses between the query image and
the rendered images. An overview of the proposed method is
presented in Fig. 2, which follows the iterative approach. The
refinement process is formulated as follows:
ˆT
∗= arg min
T ∈SE(3)
L(T
Iq, G, K, δl
R, δl
t ),
(1)
where δl
R and δl
t represent the rotation and translation pertur-
bations applied to T , generating L hypothetical poses, indexed
by l = 1, . . . , L.
In addition, our implementation can be expressed as follows:
ˆT
∗= arg min
T ∈SE(3)
L(T |Iq, I, G, K, T ref, T cl ),
(2)
where
multiple
rendered
images
is
given
by
I
=
{Iref, Ic1, Ic2, . . . , IcL}, with Iref denoting the reference
image and Icl representing the candidate image rendered from
3DGS corresponding to the initial pose T and hypothetical
poses T cl, respectively.
B. Multi-view Consistency Strategy
Previous methods [35], [36] have demonstrated that features
extracted from pre-trained CNN and Transformer backbones
can be leveraged by constructing similarity measures for
iterative pose refinement. However, the geometric relation-
ships between the query image and candidate images remain
insufficiently explored. In this section, we propose a multi-
view consistency strategy that computes the refined pose
between the relative pose of the query image and rendered
images. Specifically, we first employ a pre-trained feature
matching network to extract 2D-2D correspondences between
these images. We then introduce a matching-based multi-view
consistency procedure that enforces consistency among the
refined pose, the relative pose, and the initial pose, guided
by the modeled camera motion.
1) 2D-2D Matching via Pre-trained Model: For the set
of images, the proposed framework employs SuperPoint [71]
to extract interest point locations and descriptors from each
image. We denote the query image as Iq and the rendered
images as I = {Iref, Ic1, . . . , IcL}. For each image, a feature
extractor outputs interest point locations filtered by a detection
threshold τdetection:
{ui} = Fζ(Iq),
(3)
{uj} = Fζ(Is), Is ∈I,
(4)
where images Iq and Is have M and N interest points,
indexed by i = 1, . . . , M and j = 1, . . . , N, Fζ(·) denotes
the interest point location extractor, f i ∈R3 and f j ∈R3
denote the homogeneous pixel coordinates, respectively.
Moreover, the corresponding interest point descriptors are
extracted as:
{hi} = FΩ(Iq),
(5)
{hj} = FΩ(Is), Ir ∈I,
(6)
where FΩ(·) is the descriptor extractor, hi and hj denote the
normalized descriptors, respectively.

<!-- page 5 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
5
As for the matching stage, we employ LightGlue [72] to
predict an assignment matrix P ∈[0, 1]M×N representing the
matchability between the query and rendered image features.
Each element pij ∈P indicates the normalized pairwise
matchability between the i-th feature from Iq and the j-th
feature from Is. Feature correspondences are obtained by:
{u′
i ↔u′
j | pij > τmatching},
(7)
where τmatching is a threshold applied to filter out low-
confidence feature pairs.
2) Matching-Based Multi-view Consistency:
In our ap-
proach, the refined pose is derived from the estimated relative
poses between the query image and the rendered images.
Based on the established 2D-2D feature correspondences, we
estimate the relative pose between the query image Iq and the
rendered image Is ∈I as follows:
u′T
j K−Ts[tsq]∧RsqK−1u′
i = 0,
(8)
where K represents the camera intrinsic matrix, Rsq ∈SO(3)
denotes the relative rotation matrix, stsq ∈R3 is the scaled rel-
ative translation vector, and [tsq]∧denotes the skew-symmetric
matrix of the normalized translation vector tsq. Since Eq. (8)
is equal to zero, it inherently introduces scale ambiguity,
preventing the direct computation of the absolute translation
scale. Here, s denotes the unknown scale factor that relates
the true translation to the normalized vector tsq. To ensure
robustness against outlier correspondences, the RANSAC al-
gorithm [12] is employed during the relative pose estimation
process. Therefore, the estimated relative poses between Iq
and I = {Iref, Ic1, . . . , IcL} are defined up to an unknown
scale, and can be expressed as follows:
T qr =
Rqr
sqrtqr
0
1

,
(9)
T qcl =
Rqcl
sqcltqcl
0
1

,
(10)
where T qr represents the relative pose between the reference
image and the query image, and T qcl represents the relative
pose between the candidate image and the query image, l =
1, . . . , L denotes the index of each candidate image in the set.
To address the scale ambiguity, we establish the pose motion
relationship across multiple views, as illustrated in the second
step of Fig. 3, which can be expressed by:
ˆT = T qrT ref,
(11)
ˆT = T qclT cl.
(12)
By substituting Eq. (9) and Eq. (10) into Eq. (11) and Eq.
(12), we derive the formulation for predicting the scale factors
among the relative rotations, translations and the absolute
rotations, translations, which can be expressed as follows:
Rqr = RqclRclR−1
ref,
(13)
sqrtqr = Rqcl + sqcltqcl −Rqrtref.
(14)
After all the pairwise transformations are initialized, when it
comes to multiple candidate images, sqr can be estimated with
L possible values due to the numerous sqcl, leading to different
precise predictions for each candidate image. To ensure multi-
view consistency among various solutions, we minimize the
discrepancy based on two-view relative transformations and
camera pose motion relationship, and thereby simultaneously
obtain the calculated values, which can be formulated as:
arg min
ˆ
R,ˆt,sqr,sqcl
1
L + 1
 log( ˆ
R
−1RqrRref)

2
2
+
 ˆ
R
−1  Rqrtref + sqrtqr −ˆt

2
2
+
L
X
l=1
log( ˆ
R
−1RqclRcl)

2
2
+
L
X
l=1
 ˆ
R
−1  Rqcltcl + sqcltqcl −ˆt

2
2
!
.
(15)
C. Epipolar Geometric Constrained Optimization
While learning-based feature matching models combined
with standard outlier rejection provide reliable correspon-
dences, residual mismatches often persist. Such mismatches
often arise from intrinsic ambiguities in textureless regions,
repetitive patterns, or inaccuracies in geometric reconstruction
and surface texture. Mitigating these mismatches is essential
for preserving multi-view consistency and enhancing pose
refinement accuracy. To address these limitations, we further
enhance the robustness and accuracy of camera pose optimiza-
tion by incorporating epipolar geometry constraints.
With the estimated camera pose obtained by Eq. (15), and
according to the correspondences between the 2D point ui
of the image Iq and the 2D point u′
j of the image Is, the
u′
i can be projected onto the unique epipolar line of Is. The
coefficients of epipolar line on the Is can be defined as:
psj = K−T[tsq]∧RsqK−1u′
i
=
psjx psjy psjc
T ,
(16)
where tsq denotes the translation vector with scale factor.
After constructing the epipolar line equation, the distance
between the pixel location u′
j and its corresponding epipolar
line psj can be quantified as:
dij =
u′T
j psj
q
psjx
2 + p2
sjy
.
(17)
The camera pose is optimized through a nonlinear process
that minimizes the sum of epipolar line distances over all
matched points, as illustrated in the third step of Fig. 3. How-
ever, the presence of outliers can compromise the robustness of
the standard least squares approach. To address this issue, we
propose a robust objective function that leverages the residual
standard deviation to suppress the influence of outliers:
ˆT
∗= arg min
ˆ
T
n
F( ˆT )
o
,
(18)

<!-- page 6 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
6
(a) 5-tuples images
(b) Distance rij
Fig. 4. Illustration of scaled distance rij. (a) When L = 3, the input consists
of a 5-tuple: one query image, one reference image, and three candidate
images. (b) The scaled distance from each detected feature point to its
corresponding epipolar line, shown on the Hospital.
where F( ˆT ) can be derived as:
1
2


Nref
X
jref =1
M
X
i=1
ρ
dijref
ˆσijref

+ 1
L
L
X
l=1
Ncl
X
jcl=1
M
X
i=1
ρ
 
dijcl
ˆσijcl
!
.
(19)
Here, we use the Huber function to penalize residuals. Let
rij = dij/ˆσij. Fig. 4 illustrates the scaled distance rij between
the matched points and their corresponding epipolar lines.
Then we have:
ρ (rij) =
(
(rij)2,
if |rij| ≤1
2(rij)
1
2 −1,
otherwise,
(20)
ˆσij =
v
u
u
t
1
(m −1)(n −1)
m
X
j=1
n
X
i=1
d2
ij.
(21)
For precise pose optimization, we adopt the Levenberg–
Marquardt (LM) algorithm [73] to approximate the solution
of the nonlinear least squares problem in our refinement
framework. Directly optimizing in the special Euclidean group
SE(3) is challenging due to its six degrees of freedom
being represented by redundant parameters in rotation ma-
trices and translation vectors. To address this, we parame-
terize the camera pose in the associated Lie algebra se(3),
which provides a minimal and locally Euclidean represen-
tation suitable for gradient-based optimization. Specifically,
the rotation and translation vectors are expressed as se(3) =
n
ξ =
 ρ ϕ T ∈R6, ρ ∈R3, ϕ ∈so(3)
o
. Let ϕ = θa and
t = Jρ, where J is computed as:
J = sin θ
θ
I +

1 −sin θ
θ

aaT + 1 −cos θ
θ
a∧,
(22)
where θ denotes the magnitude of ϕ, and a represents the
corresponding unit direction vector. Ultimately, the trajectory
converges after several iterations of the optimization process.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
In this section, we first describe the datasets, metrics,
and implementation details. Then, we compare our method
against baseline methods. Furthermore, we conduct ablation
studies to validate the effectiveness of each component in our
method. Finally, we analyze failure cases and limitations of
our approach.
A. Datasets and Metrics
To evaluate the performance of our pose refinement frame-
work, we conduct experiments on the 7-Scenes and the Cam-
bridge Landmarks datasets, which are commonly used in the
visual localization task.
1) 7-Scenes Dataset: The Microsoft 7-Scenes dataset [74]
[75] is a widely used benchmark for indoor visual localization.
7-Scenes includes scenes such as Chess, Fire, Heads, Office,
Pumpkin, RedKitchen, and Stairs, with areas ranging from 1
m2 to 18 m2. This dataset presents significant challenges for
visual relocalization due to repetitive structures, textureless
regions, and motion blur, all of which introduce unique diffi-
culties during the pose estimation process.
2) Cambridge Landmarks Dataset: The Cambridge Land-
marks dataset [45] is a large-scale outdoor benchmark that
covers urban scenes around Cambridge University, including
King, Hospital, Shop, and Church, with scene sizes ranging
from 875 m2 to 5600 m2. The Cambridge dataset is par-
ticularly challenging due to varying lighting conditions and
numerous moving distractors, such as pedestrians and vehicles,
present in different sequences of recorded data.
3) Metrics: To evaluate the accuracy of the pose estimation
results, we use the median translation and rotation error as
evaluation metrics following [45]. The translation error e(ˆt)
and the rotation error e( ˆ
R) are calculated by:
e(ˆt) =
ˆt −tgt

2
(23)
e( ˆ
R) = arccos

(trace( ˆR
TRgt) −1)/2

(24)
where ˆ
R and ˆt represent the refinement rotation and translation
of methods and Rgt and tgt denote the ground-truth rotation
and translation. And trace (·) denotes the trace of the matrix.
We compete against the following baselines:
a) APR Methods: We compare our method to against
Absolute Pose Regression (APR) techniques, which train end-
to-end networks to directly regress the camera pose from the
query image, including Ms-Transformer [17], DFNet [18],
LENS [19], and Marepo [54].
b) Camera Pose Refinement: We evaluate our method
against pose refiners such as FQN [53], CrossFire [26],
NeFeS [27], and HR-APR [28], which rely on dedicated
neural networks with NeRF scene representation. In contrast,
MCLoc [35] leverages 3DGS and generic pre-trained features
to compute feature-level similarity and refines the camera pose
through Monte Carlo sampling.
Remark 1: We report median translation error e(ˆt) and
median rotation error e( ˆ
R). In Table I–IV, the best results
for each category are in bold, and the second-best results are
underlined. Results that are both underlined and italicized cor-
respond to the results reported in Table II. ”TS” denotes per-
scene training of dedicated neural networks, and ”-” indicates
that no such training is required. “DFNet/Marepo + GS-SMC”

<!-- page 7 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
7
TABLE I
QUANTITATIVE RESULTS ON THE INDOOR 7-SCENES DATASET.
WE REPORT MEDIAN TRANSLATION ERROR e(ˆt)(cm) AND MEDIAN ROTATION ERROR e( ˆ
R)(◦).
Methods
Chess
Fire
Heads
Office
Pumpkin
RedKitchen
Stairs
Average ↓
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
APR
Ms-Transformer [17]
11
4.66
24
9.6
14
12.19
17
5.66
18
4.44
17
5.94
26
8.45
31.75
7.27
DFNet [18]
3.3
1.12
6
2.3
4
2.29
6
1.54
7
1.92
7
1.74
12
2.63
6.47
1.93
LENS [19]
3
1.3
10
3.7
7
5.8
7
1.9
8
2.2
9
2.2
14
3.6
8.28
2.96
Marepo [54]
2.1
1.24
2.3
1.39
1.8
2.03
2.8
1.26
3.5
1.48
4.2
1.71
5.6
1.67
3.19
1.54
Pose Refiners
FQN [53]
4
1.3
10
3.0
4
2.4
10
3.0
9
2.4
16
4.4
140
34.7
25.57
7.31
CrossFire [26]
1
0.4
5
1.9
3
2.3
5
1.6
3
0.8
2
0.8
12
1.9
4.43
1.39
DFNet+NeFeS [27]
2
0.57
2
0.74
2
1.28
2
0.56
2
0.55
2
0.57
5
1.28
2.42
0.79
DFNet+HR-APR [28]
2
0.55
2
0.75
2
1.45
2
0.64
2
0.62
2
0.67
5
1.30
2.42
0.85
MCLoc [35]
2
0.8
3
1.4
3
1.3
4
1.3
5
1.6
6
1.6
6
2.0
4.14
1.42
DFNet+GS-SMC (ours)
0.65
0.21
0.97
0.38
0.71
0.44
1.5
0.40
1.5
0.31
1.1
0.28
2.9
0.81
1.33
0.40
Marepo+GS-SMC (ours)
0.64
0.20
0.88
0.36
0.70
0.43
1.4
0.37
1.4
0.28
1.0
0.26
1.9
0.54
1.13
0.34
(a) DFNet [18]
(b) Marepo [54]
(c) D.+GS-SMC (ours)
(d) M.+GS-SMC (ours)
Fig. 5. Visualization of GS-SMC improves pose prediction for DFNet and Marepo on the 7-Scenes dataset. Each subfigure is split diagonally, with the bottom
left displaying the ground truth query image and the top right showing the rendered image with the estimated/refined pose. (1st row: the Heads scene, 2nd
row: the RedKitchen scene, 3rd row: the Stairs scene.)
represents that our proposed refinement process integrates the
result of DFNet [18] and Marepo [54] as the initial pose.
“+w/o. multi-view” indicates the ablation study without a
multi-view consistency strategy. “+w/o. EGC” indicates the
ablation study without epipolar geometry constraints.
B. Implementation Details
For the 7-Scenes dataset, as demonstrated in [27], [54], the
SfM ground truth (GT) [75] is capable of rendering more
detailed scene structures and provides enhanced geometric
accuracy compared to dSLAM GT for the 7-Scenes dataset.
Additionally, for the Cambridge Landmarks dataset, we em-
ploy the GT provided by [45].
In the experimental implementation, we employ the official
pre-trained SuperPoint [71] and LightGlue [72] models for 2D-
2D correspondences, without fine-tuning. Our method refines
the pose iteratively, with each iteration computing the pose
by estimating the relative poses between the query image
and the rendered images. We set the number of iterations to
six for the 7-Scenes dataset, while perturbing the initial pose
with Gaussian noise, with a standard deviation of 4 cm for
translation and 0.01◦for rotation, to render candidate images.
For the Cambridge Landmarks dataset, the refinement process
is terminated after four steps, with the initial pose perturbed by
Gaussian noise with standard deviations of 4 m for translation
and 2◦for rotation.

<!-- page 8 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
8
TABLE II
COMPARISON RESULTS ON THE CAMBRIDGE LANDMARKS DATASET.
Methods
Kings
Hospital
Shop
Church
Average ↓
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
e(ˆt)
e( ˆ
R)
APR
Ms-Transformer [17]
TS
0.83 m
1.47◦
1.81 m
2.39◦
0.86 m
3.07◦
1.62 m
3.99◦
1.28 m
2.73◦
DFNet [18]
TS
0.73 m
2.37◦
2.0 m
2.98◦
0.67 m
2.21◦
1.37 m
4.03◦
1.19 m
2.90◦
LENS [19]
TS
0.33 m
0.5◦
0.44 m
0.9◦
0.25 m
1.6◦
0.53 m
1.6◦
0.39 m
1.15◦
Pose Refiners
FQN [53]
TS
0.28 m
0.4◦
0.54 m
0.8◦
0.13 m
0.6◦
0.58 m
2.0◦
0.38 m
0.95◦
CrossFire [26]
TS
0.47 m
0.7◦
0.43 m
0.7◦
0.2 m
1.2◦
0.39 m
1.4◦
0.37 m
1.0◦
DFNet+NeFeS [27]
TS
0.37 m
0.54◦
0.52 m
0.88◦
0.15 m
0.53◦
0.37 m
1.14◦
0.35 m
0.77◦
DFNet+HR-APR [28]
TS
0.36 m
0.58◦
0.53 m
0.89◦
0.13 m
0.51◦
0.38 m
1.16◦
0.35 m
0.79◦
MCLoc [35]
-
0.31 m
0.42◦
0.39 m
0.73◦
0.12 m
0.45◦
0.26 m
0.88◦
0.27 m
0.62◦
DFNet+GS-SMC (ours)
-
0.24 m
0.26◦
0.25 m
0.39◦
0.05 m
0.24◦
0.10 m
0.28◦
0.16 m
0.29◦
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
Med. Transl. err. [cm]
Optimization Steps
 RedKitchen(D.+ours)
 Office(D.+ours)
 RedKitchen(M.+ours)
 Office(M.+ours)
 DFNet
 Marepo
5
6
1.0
1.2
1.4
1.6
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
0.0
0.5
1.0
1.5
2.0
2.5
3.0
Med. Rot. err. [°]
Optimization Steps
 RedKitchen(D.+ours)
 Office(D.+ours)
 RedKitchen(M.+ours)
 Office(M.+ours)
 DFNet
 Marepo
5
6
0.3
0.4
(b)
Fig. 6.
Optimization trajectory on the 7-Scenes dataset. We present the
variation in median error with respect to the number of optimization iterations
for DFNet+GS-SMC (ours) and Marepo+GS-SMC (ours) across two scenes.
C. Results on the 7-Scenes
In this section, we evaluate our method on the 7-Scenes
dataset, comparing it against four leading APR methods [17],
[18], [19], [54] and five state-of-the-art pose refinement ap-
proaches [53], [26], [27], [28], [35].
As a pose refinement method, GS-SMC can be seamlessly
integrated into existing pose estimation pipelines to enhance
their performance. In this experiment, we use the estimated
poses from DFNet [18] and Marepo [54] as initial inputs to
evaluate our approach. As shown in Table I, without requiring
task-specific training or additional fine-tuning, Marepo+GS-
SMC achieves superior localization performance, outperform-
ing all compared APR and pose refinement methods, with
DFNet+GS-SMC achieving the second-best results. Specifi-
cally, compared to using Marepo [54] alone as the initial pose,
GS-SMC further reduces the median translation and rotation
errors by 2.06 cm and 1.2◦, demonstrating its effectiveness as
a pose refinement module. Moreover, compared to state-of-
the-art refinement techniques, Marepo+GS-SMC reduces the
average median translation error and rotation error by 1.29 m
and 0.45◦for NeFeS [27], 1.29 m and 0.51◦for HR-APR [28],
and 3.01 m and 1.08◦for MCLoc [35].
Furthermore, as shown in Fig.5, the rendered images using
our results are closer to the query images, even in challenging
scenes with repetitive textures, significantly improving the
performance of both DFNet and Marepo. Notably, integrating
our method with Marepo achieves better results, as shown
in Fig.5(c), Fig.5(d), and Table I. While a better initial pose
further improves the refinement results of our method, this
improvement is limited in some cases.
Additionally, on the 7-Scenes dataset, we set the opti-
mization to six refinement steps, although satisfactory results
are often achieved much earlier, as shown in Fig. 6. The
optimization trajectory reveals that more accurate initial pose
estimation improves the refinement process and reduces the
number of iterations required. Overall, we conclude that our
method significantly exceeds the performance of state-of-the-
art refinement methods in terms of accuracy.
D. Results on the Cambridge Landmarks
Compared to the indoor 7-Scenes dataset, the outdoor
Cambridge Landmarks dataset presents more complex and
challenging scenes, including lighting variations and moving
objects. Similarly, we compare our method with APR methods,
including Ms-Transformer [17], DFNet [18], LENS [19], as
well as pose refinement methods, including FQN [53], Cross-
Fire [26], NeFeS [27], HR-APR [28], and MCLoc [35].
We employ DFNet [18] as the initial pose and iteratively
refine it using our proposed GS-SMC to evaluate its effec-
tiveness. The results presented in Table II show that GS-
SMC achieves the highest overall performance, surpassing all
state-of-the-art APR methods and pose refinement techniques,
including MCLoc [35], NeFeS [27], and HR-APR [28], in both
translation and rotation accuracy. Specifically, compared to the
baseline MCLoc, GS-SMC reduces the average translation and
rotation errors by 0.11 m and 0.33◦respectively. Moreover,
when applied to DFNet as the initial estimates, GS-SMC
further improves localization, reducing translation error by
1.03 m and rotation error by 2.61◦. As illustrated in Fig.7(b),
the rendered image corresponding to the refined pose obtained
using our method aligns more closely with the ground truth
query image. Moreover, the refined camera trajectories shown
in Fig.8 further demonstrate the robustness and stability of
GS-SMC in large-scale outdoor scenes, with the Kings scene
exhibiting the largest X-axis span of approximately 150 m.
However, it is worth noting that the complexity of outdoor
scenes can sometimes lead to optimization failures. These
limitations are discussed further in Sec. IV-F.
E. Ablation Studies
We discuss the validation of the multi-view consistency
strategy and epipolar geometry constraints (EGC), as well as

<!-- page 9 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
9
(a) DFNet [18]
(b) D.+GS-SMC (ours)
(c) D.+w/o. multi-view
(d) D.+w/o. EGC
Fig. 7.
Visualization of GS-SMC improves pose prediction for DFNet on the Cambridge Landmarks dataset. The rows sequentially present the scenes of
Church, Shop, and Hospital. Each subfigure is split diagonally, with the bottom left displaying the ground truth query image and the top right showing the
rendered estimated/refined pose.
(a) Kings
(b) Church
(c) Shop
Fig. 8. Predicted camera trajectories for the Cambridge dataset scene, with gray lines indicating translation errors between the estimated and ground truth.
TABLE III
ABLATION EXPERIMENTS
ON THE CAMBRIDGE DATASET.
Methods
Hospital
Shop
e(ˆt)(m)
e( ˆ
R)(◦)
e(ˆt)(m)
e( ˆ
R)(◦)
DFNet [18]
2.0
2.98
0.67
2.21
D.+GS-SMC (ours)
0.25
0.39
0.05
0.24
D.+w/o. multi-view
1.99
1.24
0.68
0.77
D.+w/o. EGC
0.48
1.01
0.11
0.52
the impact of the number of candidate images and initial pose
perturbations during iterative refinement. We conduct experi-
ments on the Cambridge Landmarks dataset, using DFNet [18]
as the baseline for comparison.
1) Verification of Multi-view Consistency Strategy: To as-
sess the effect of the multi-view strategy, we conducted an
ablation study by estimating only the relative pose between
the query and reference images. Results, shown in the third
TABLE IV
EFFECTS OF DIFFERENT NOISE STANDARD DEVIATIONS FOR TRANSLATION
AND ROTATION PERTURBATIONS ON THE CAMBRIDGE DATASET.
Hospital
Shop
e(ˆt)(m)
e( ˆ
R)(◦)
e(ˆt)(m)
e( ˆ
R)(◦)
N=6
[1, 1]
0.29
0.48
0.06
0.24
[3, 4]
0.26
0.45
0.05
0.25
[4, 1]
0.26
0.44
0.05
0.26
[4, 2]
0.25
0.39
0.05
0.24
[4, 3]
0.25
0.38
0.05
0.24
row of Table III, indicate minimal improvement in translation
and limited improvement in rotation when the multi-view
strategy is omitted. As illustrated in Fig. 7(c), excluding multi-
view consistency during refinement substantially degrades
performance on outdoor datasets. These findings confirm that
incorporating multi-view consistency is essential for accurate
pose estimation, particularly in challenging scenarios.

<!-- page 10 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
10
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
Med. Transl. err. [m]
Optimization Steps
 Hospital(D.+GS-SMC)
 Shop(D.+GS-SMC)
 Hospital(D.+w/o.EGC)
 Shop(D.+w/o.EGC)
 DFNet
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
0
1
2
3
Med. Rot. err. [°]
Optimization Steps
 Hospital(D.+GS-SMC)
 Shop(D.+GS-SMC)
 Hospital(D.+w/o.EGC)
 Shop(D.+w/o.EGC)
 DFNet
(b)
Fig.
9.
Optimization
Trajectories
of
DFNet+GS-SMC(ours)
and
DFNet+without EGC on the Cambridge Dataset, across the scenes of
Hospital and Shop.
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.0
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
Med. Transl. err. [m]
Num. Candidate Images
 Hospital
 Shop
(a)
0
1
2
3
4
5
6
7
8
9
0.2
0.3
0.4
0.5
0.6
0.7
Med. Rot. err. [°]
Num. Candidate Images
 Hospital
 Shop
(b)
Fig. 10. Effects of the number of candidate images on the Cambridge dataset,
across the scenes of Hospital and Shop.
2) Verification of Epipolar Geometric Constraints: We con-
duct experiments to evaluate the effectiveness of Epipolar
Geometric Constraints (EGC) by constructing a variant of
our GS-SMC framework without it. As shown in Table III,
removing EGC significantly reduces pose estimation accuracy,
with localization errors increasing by 0.24 m and 0.62◦for
the Hospital scene, and 0.06 m and 0.28◦for the Shop scene.
Figure 7(c) illustrates that the rendered images without EGC
align less closely with the query images. Moreover, compar-
isons in Fig. 9 indicate that iterative convergence without EGC
is slower and more unstable, whereas our GS-SMC method
achieves smoother, more stable, and superior results.
3) Variable Number of Candidate Images: To examine the
impact of the number of candidate images, we evaluate the
performance across varying numbers of candidates, as shown
in Fig.10. In this experiment, candidate poses are perturbed
with Gaussian noise of 4 m in translation and 2◦in rotation.
The results show that the translation error remains relatively
constant even as more candidates are added, while the median
rotation error continues to decrease with additional candidates
before eventually converging. Notably, even with only two
candidate images, our method still outperforms MCLoc [35],
as shown in Table II.
4) Variable Translation and Rotation Perturbations: Ta-
ble IV extends the localization evaluation by varying the
standard deviations of Gaussian noise applied to the translation
and rotation perturbations of the initial pose, which are then
used to render the candidate images. In this experiment, the
number of candidate images is fixed at six. Since improving
translation accuracy is generally more challenging, we focus
(a) Query
(b) Rendered GT
(c) Reference
Fig. 11. Visualization of failure cases. First row: represents the Kings, where
the occlusion caused by transient interfering objects. Second row: represents
the Church, where shows the inaccuracy of the initial pose estimation.
on minimizing translation errors. The results indicate that
translation perturbations have a greater effect on translation
accuracy than rotation perturbations. Furthermore, once the
perturbation magnitude exceeds a certain range, increasing it
further has only a marginal impact on performance, show-
ing that performance becomes largely insensitive to further
increases in the perturbation magnitude.
F. Failure Cases and Limitations
Currently, our proposed pose refinement approach has some
limitations. Fig. 11 illustrates observed failure cases in our
experiments. One such failure case arises in highly dynamic
environments, where rapidly moving objects can occlude vi-
sually similar features. This may create discrepancies between
rendered and query images, thereby reducing the reliability of
feature correspondences. While these challenges mainly stem
from scene dynamics, another critical limitation is tied to the
quality of the initial pose estimation. Large deviations often
prevent convergence and may even mislead the refinement
process by producing rendered views that significantly diverge
from the real scene structure. Given these inherent limitations
in our current framework, we anticipate that our methodology
will continue to benefit from advancements in initial pose esti-
mation methods and pre-trained matchers, ultimately resulting
in more precise and reliable computations.
V. CONCLUSIONS
This paper proposes GS-SMC, a novel camera pose re-
finement framework based on 3D Gaussian Splatting, which
eliminates the need for specific descriptors or dedicated neural
networks. Specifically, we leverage an existing 3DGS model
to generate multiple rendered images, allowing our method to
adapt to new scenes without requiring task-specific training or
fine-tuning. Furthermore, we propose an iterative refinement
approach to estimate the camera pose based on relative poses
computed between the query image and the rendered images.
Our method supports flexible use of feature extractors and
matchers to establish the 2D-2D correspondences required
for computing these relative poses. To mitigate the impact
of mismatches, we incorporate epipolar geometry constraints
with weighted contributions to enhance robustness during
the iterative refinement. Extensive experiments demonstrate
that the proposed GS-SMC outperforms state-of-the-art pose

<!-- page 11 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
11
refinement methods, achieving superior accuracy on both the
7-Scenes dataset and the Cambridge Landmarks dataset.
REFERENCES
[1] Y. Huang, S. Meng, Y. Zhu, J. Wang, J. Cao, X. Qiao, and X. Su,
“Webarnav: Mobile web ar indoor navigation with edge-assisted vision
localization,” IEEE Transactions on Mobile Computing, 2025.
[2] H. Bao, W. Xie, Q. Qian, D. Chen, S. Zhai, N. Wang, and G. Zhang,
“Robust tightly-coupled visual-inertial odometry with pre-built maps
in high latency situations,” IEEE transactions on visualization and
computer graphics, vol. 28, no. 5, pp. 2212–2222, 2022.
[3] J. H. Jung, Y. Choe, and C. G. Park, “Photometric visual-inertial
navigation with uncertainty-aware ensembles,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 2039–2052, 2022.
[4] H. Zhai, G. Huang, Q. Hu, G. Li, H. Bao, and G. Zhang, “Nis-slam:
Neural implicit semantic rgb-d slam for 3d consistent scene understand-
ing,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2024.
[5] X. Lei, M. Wang, W. Zhou, and H. Li, “Gaussnav: Gaussian splatting for
visual navigation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence, vol. 47, no. 5, pp. 4108–4121, 2025.
[6] T. Chen, O. Shorinwa, J. Bruno, A. Swann, J. Yu, W. Zeng, K. Nagami,
P. Dames, and M. Schwager, “Splat-nav: Safe real-time robot navigation
in gaussian splatting maps,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 41, pp.
2765–2784, 2025.
[7] J. L. Sch¨onberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,”
in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
(CVPR), 2016, pp. 4104–4113.
[8] H. Cui, X. Gao, S. Shen, and Z. Hu, “Hsfm: Hybrid structure-from-
motion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 1212–1221.
[9] P.-E. Sarlin, C. Cadena, R. Siegwart, and M. Dymczyk, “From coarse to
fine: Robust hierarchical localization at large scale,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2019, pp. 12 716–12 725.
[10] F. Ge, Y. Zhang, L. Wang, S. Coleman, and D. Kerr, “Double-domain
adaptation semantics for retrieval-based long-term visual localization,”
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 26, pp. 6050–6064, 2024.
[11] N.
Piasco,
D.
Sidib´e,
C.
Demonceaux,
and
V.
Gouet-Brunet,
“Perspective-n-learned-point: Pose estimation from relative depth,” in
British machine vision conference (BMVC), 2019.
[12] M. FISCHLER AND, “Random sample consensus: a paradigm for
model fitting with applications to image analysis and automated car-
tography,” Commun. ACM, vol. 24, no. 6, pp. 381–395, 1981.
[13] E. Brachmann and C. Rother, “Visual camera re-localization from rgb
and rgb-d images using dsac,” IEEE transactions on pattern analysis
and machine intelligence, vol. 44, no. 9, pp. 5847–5865, 2021.
[14] E. Brachmann, T. Cavallari, and V. A. Prisacariu, “Accelerated coordi-
nate encoding: Learning to relocalize in minutes using rgb and poses,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 5044–5053.
[15] F. Wang, X. Jiang, S. Galliani, C. Vogel, and M. Pollefeys, “Glace:
Global local accelerated coordinate encoding,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 21 562–21 571.
[16] B. Wang, C. Chen, C. X. Lu, P. Zhao, N. Trigoni, and A. Markham,
“Atloc: Attention guided camera localization,” in Proceedings of the
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 34, no. 06, 2020, pp.
10 393–10 401.
[17] Y. Shavit, R. Ferens, and Y. Keller, “Learning multi-scene absolute
pose regression with transformers,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp. 2733–2742.
[18] S. Chen, X. Li, Z. Wang, and V. A. Prisacariu, “Dfnet: Enhance absolute
pose regression with direct feature matching,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision.
Springer, 2022, pp. 1–17.
[19] A.
Moreau,
N.
Piasco,
D.
Tsishkou,
B.
Stanciulescu,
and
A. de La Fortelle, “Lens: Localization enhanced by nerf synthesis,” in
Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2022, pp. 1347–1356.
[20] J. Miao, K. Jiang, T. Wen, Y. Wang, P. Jia, B. Wijaya, X. Zhao,
Q. Cheng, Z. Xiao, J. Huang et al., “A survey on monocular re-
localization: From the perspective of scene map representation,” IEEE
Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, 2024.
[21] P.-E. Sarlin, A. Unagar, M. Larsson, H. Germain, C. Toft, V. Larsson,
M. Pollefeys, V. Lepetit, L. Hammarstrand, F. Kahl et al., “Back to
the feature: Learning robust camera localization from pixels to pose,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2021, pp. 3247–3257.
[22] J. Hyeon, J. Kim, and N. Doh, “Pose correction for highly accurate
visual localization in large-scale indoor spaces,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021, pp.
15 974–15 983.
[23] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106,
2021.
[24] L. Yen-Chen, P. Florence, J. T. Barron, A. Rodriguez, P. Isola, and T.-Y.
Lin, “Inerf: Inverting neural radiance fields for pose estimation,” in 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1323–1330.
[25] Y. Lin, T. M¨uller, J. Tremblay, B. Wen, S. Tyree, A. Evans, P. A. Vela,
and S. Birchfield, “Parallel inversion of neural radiance fields for robust
pose estimation,” in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 9377–9384.
[26] A. Moreau, N. Piasco, M. Bennehar, D. Tsishkou, B. Stanciulescu,
and A. de La Fortelle, “Crossfire: Camera relocalization on self-
supervised features from an implicit representation,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp.
252–262.
[27] S. Chen, Y. Bhalgat, X. Li, J.-W. Bian, K. Li, Z. Wang, and V. A.
Prisacariu, “Neural refinement for absolute pose regression with feature
synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), June 2024, pp. 20 987–20 996.
[28] C. Liu, S. Chen, Y. Zhao, H. Huang, V. Prisacariu, and T. Braud, “Hr-
apr: Apr-agnostic framework with uncertainty estimation and hierarchi-
cal refinement for camera relocalisation,” in 2024 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2024, pp.
8544–8550.
[29] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, and G. Drettakis, “3d gaussian
splatting for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Trans. Graph.,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023.
[30] B. Fei, J. Xu, R. Zhang, Q. Zhou, W. Yang, and Y. He, “3d gaussian
splatting as new era: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
Computer Graphics, 2024.
[31] Y. Wang, J. Wang, R. Gao, Y. Qu, W. Duan, S. Yang, and Y. Qi, “Look
at the sky: Sky-aware efficient 3d gaussian splatting in the wild,” IEEE
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2025.
[32] K. Botashev, V. Pyatov, G. Ferrer, and S. Lefkimmiatis, “Gsloc: Visual
localization with 3d gaussian splatting,” in 2024 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2024, pp.
5664–5671.
[33] Z. Zhou, F. Hui, Y. Wu, and Y. Liu, “Six-dof pose estimation with
efficient 3-d gaussian splatting representation for visual relocalization,”
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, pp. 1–10, 2024.
[34] C. Liu, S. Chen, Y. S. Bhalgat, S. HU, M. Cheng, Z. Wang, V. A.
Prisacariu, and T. Braud, “GS-CPR: Efficient camera pose refinement
via 3d gaussian splatting,” in The Thirteenth International Conference
on Learning Representations, 2025, pp. 1–20. [Online]. Available:
https://openreview.net/forum?id=mP7uV59iJM
[35] G. Trivigno, C. Masone, B. Caputo, and T. Sattler, “The unreasonable
effectiveness of pre-trained features for camera pose refinement,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 12 786–12 798.
[36] H. Li, C. Xu, W. Yang, L. Mi, H. Yu, H. Zhang, and G.-S. Xia, “Unsu-
pervised multi-view uav image geo-localization via iterative rendering,”
IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, pp. 1–1, 2025.
[37] T. Sattler, B. Leibe, and L. Kobbelt, “Improving image-based local-
ization by active correspondence search,” in European conference on
computer vision.
Springer, 2012, pp. 752–765.
[38] F. Reyes-Aviles, P. Fleck, D. Schmalstieg, and C. Arth, “Bag of world
anchors for instant large-scale localization,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 29, no. 11, pp. 4730–4739,
2023.
[39] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,”
International journal of computer vision, vol. 60, pp. 91–110, 2004.
[40] J. Wang, Y. Zhong, Y. Dai, S. Birchfield, K. Zhang, N. Smolyanskiy,
and H. Li, “Deep two-view structure-from-motion revisited,” in Pro-
ceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2021, pp. 8953–8962.
[41] J. Wang, N. Karaev, C. Rupprecht, and D. Novotny, “Vggsfm: Visual
geometry grounded deep structure from motion,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2024,
pp. 21 686–21 697.

<!-- page 12 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2021
12
[42] C. Chen, B. Wang, C. X. Lu, N. Trigoni, and A. Markham, “Deep learn-
ing for visual localization and mapping: A survey,” IEEE Transactions
on Neural Networks and Learning Systems, 2023.
[43] E. Brachmann, F. Michel, A. Krull, M. Y. Yang, S. Gumhold, and
C. Rother, “Uncertainty-driven 6d pose estimation of objects and scenes
from a single rgb image,” in 2016 IEEE Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2016, pp. 3364–3372.
[44] E. Brachmann and C. Rother, “Learning less is more-6d camera localiza-
tion via 3d surface regression,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2018, pp. 4654–4662.
[45] A. Kendall, M. Grimes, and R. Cipolla, “Posenet: A convolutional
network for real-time 6-dof camera relocalization,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE international conference on computer vision, 2015, pp. 2938–
2946.
[46] A. Kendall and R. Cipolla, “Geometric loss functions for camera pose
regression with deep learning,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017, pp. 5974–5983.
[47] F. Walch, C. Hazirbas, L. Leal-Taixe, T. Sattler, S. Hilsenbeck, and
D. Cremers, “Image-based localization using lstms for structured feature
correlation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on
computer vision, 2017, pp. 627–637.
[48] H. Li, X. Yang, H. Zhai, Y. Liu, H. Bao, and G. Zhang, “Vox-
surf: Voxel-based implicit surface representation,” IEEE Transactions on
Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 30, no. 3, pp. 1743–1755,
2022.
[49] Y. Shi, Y. Tao, M. Yang, Y. Liu, L. Yi, and B. Zhou, “Articulated motion-
aware nerf for 3d dynamic appearance and geometry reconstruction by
implicit motion states,” IEEE transactions on visualization and computer
graphics, 2024.
[50] S. Chen, Z. Wang, and V. Prisacariu, “Direct-posenet: Absolute pose
regression with photometric consistency,” in 2021 International Confer-
ence on 3D Vision (3DV).
IEEE, 2021, pp. 1175–1185.
[51] H. Li, H. Zhai, X. Yang, Z. Wu, Y. Zheng, H. Wang, J. Wu, H. Bao,
and G. Zhang, “Imtooth: Neural implicit tooth for dental augmented
reality,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 29, no. 5, pp. 2837–2846, 2023.
[52] D. Maggio, M. Abate, J. Shi, C. Mario, and L. Carlone, “Loc-nerf:
Monte carlo localization using neural radiance fields,” in 2023 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2023, pp. 4018–4025.
[53] H. Germain, D. DeTone, G. Pascoe, T. Schmidt, D. Novotny, R. New-
combe, C. Sweeney, R. Szeliski, and V. Balntas, “Feature query net-
works: Neural surface description for camera pose refinement,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 5071–5081.
[54] S. Chen, T. Cavallari, V. A. Prisacariu, and E. Brachmann, “Map-
relative pose regression for visual re-localization,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 20 665–20 674.
[55] T. Lu, M. Yu, L. Xu, Y. Xiangli, L. Wang, D. Lin, and B. Dai,
“Scaffold-gs: Structured 3d gaussians for view-adaptive rendering,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 20 654–20 664.
[56] Y. Sun, X. Wang, Y. Zhang, J. Zhang, C. Jiang, Y. Guo, and F. Wang,
“icomma: Inverting 3d gaussian splatting for camera pose estimation via
comparing and matching,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.09031, 2023.
[57] Z. Niu, Z. Tan, J. Zhang, X. Yang, and D. Hu, “Hgsloc: 3dgs-based
heuristic camera pose refinement,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.10925,
2024.
[58] R. Zhu, Y. Liang, H. Chang, J. Deng, J. Lu, W. Yang, T. Zhang, and
Y. Zhang, “Motiongs: Exploring explicit motion guidance for deformable
3d gaussian splatting,” Advances in Neural Information Processing
Systems, vol. 37, pp. 101 790–101 817, 2024.
[59] W. Meng, T. Wu, H. Yin, and F. Zhang, “Nurf: Nudging the particle
filter in radiance fields for robot visual localization,” IEEE Transactions
on Cognitive and Developmental Systems, pp. 1–10, 2025.
[60] H. Zhai, X. Zhang, B. Zhao, H. Li, Y. He, Z. Cui, H. Bao, and G. Zhang,
“Splatloc: 3d gaussian splatting-based visual localization for augmented
reality,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 3591–3601, 2025.
[61] L. Yang, X. Zhao, Q. Sun, K. Wang, A. Chen, and P. Kang, “Splatpose:
Geometry-aware 6-dof pose estimation from single rgb image via 3d
gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.05174, 2025.
[62] J. Engel, V. Koltun, and D. Cremers, “Direct sparse odometry,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 40, no. 3,
pp. 611–625, 2017.
[63] Z. Yan, M. Ye, and L. Ren, “Dense visual slam with probabilistic
surfel map,” IEEE transactions on visualization and computer graphics,
vol. 23, no. 11, pp. 2389–2398, 2017.
[64] L. Von Stumberg, P. Wenzel, N. Yang, and D. Cremers, “Lm-reloc:
Levenberg-marquardt based direct visual relocalization,” in 2020 Inter-
national Conference on 3D Vision (3DV).
IEEE, 2020, pp. 968–977.
[65] L. Von Stumberg, P. Wenzel, Q. Khan, and D. Cremers, “Gn-net: The
gauss-newton loss for multi-weather relocalization,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 890–897, 2020.
[66] J. Zhu, S. Yan, L. Wang, S. Zhang, Y. Liu, and M. Zhang, “Lod-
loc: Aerial visual localization using lod 3d map with neural wireframe
alignment,” Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, vol. 37,
pp. 119 063–119 098, 2024.
[67] J. Zhu, S. Peng, L. Wang, H. Tan, Y. Liu, M. Zhang, and S. Yan, “Lod-
loc v2: Aerial visual localization over low level-of-detail city models
using explicit silhouette alignment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2507.00659,
2025.
[68] J. B. Diederik P. Kingma, “Adam: A method for stochastic optimization,”
International Conference on Learning Representations (ICLR), 2015.
[69] M. Pietrantoni, G. Csurka, M. Humenberger, and T. Sattler, “Self-
supervised learning of neural implicit feature fields for camera pose
refinement,” in 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV).
IEEE, 2024, pp. 484–494.
[70] Y. Liu, R. Wu, S. Yan, X. Cheng, J. Zhu, Y. Liu, and M. Zhang,
“Atloc: Aerial thermal images localization via view synthesis,” IEEE
Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing, vol. 62, pp. 1–13,
2024.
[71] D. DeTone, T. Malisiewicz, and A. Rabinovich, “Superpoint: Self-
supervised interest point detection and description,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition
workshops, 2018, pp. 224–236.
[72] P. Lindenberger, P.-E. Sarlin, and M. Pollefeys, “Lightglue: Local feature
matching at light speed,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision, 2023, pp. 17 627–17 638.
[73] J. J. Mor´e, “The levenberg-marquardt algorithm: implementation and
theory,” in Numerical analysis: proceedings of the biennial Conference
held at Dundee, June 28–July 1, 1977.
Springer, 2006, pp. 105–116.
[74] J. Shotton, B. Glocker, C. Zach, S. Izadi, A. Criminisi, and A. Fitzgib-
bon, “Scene coordinate regression forests for camera relocalization in
rgb-d images,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, 2013, pp. 2930–2937.
[75] E. Brachmann, M. Humenberger, C. Rother, and T. Sattler, “On the limits
of pseudo ground truth in visual camera re-localisation,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision, 2021,
pp. 6218–6228.
