<!-- page 1 -->
ProDyG: Progressive Dynamic Scene Reconstruction
via Gaussian Splatting from Monocular Videos
Shi Chen
ETH Zürich
Erik Sandström
Google
Sandro Lombardi
Independent Researcher
Siyuan Li
ETH Zürich
Martin R. Oswald
University of Amsterdam
Abstract
Achieving truly practical dynamic 3D reconstruction requires online operation,
global pose and map consistency, detailed appearance modeling, and the flexibility
to handle both RGB and RGB-D inputs. However, existing SLAM methods
typically merely remove the dynamic parts or require RGB-D input, while offline
methods are not scalable to long video sequences, and current transformer-based
feedforward methods lack global consistency and appearance details. To this end,
we achieve online dynamic scene reconstruction by disentangling the static and
dynamic parts within a SLAM system. The poses are tracked robustly with a
novel motion masking strategy, and dynamic parts are reconstructed leveraging
a progressive adaptation of a Motion Scaffolds graph. Our method yields novel
view renderings competitive to offline methods and achieves on-par tracking with
state-of-the-art dynamic SLAM methods.
1
Introduction
Dynamic scene reconstruction is fundamental to problems like action recognition, scene under-
standing, autonomous driving, robotics and augmented reality, because it provides a temporally
consistent spatial understanding of how objects and agents move and interact in their environment —
an essential prerequisite for any system to perceive, predict, and act in the world. This problem has
been tackled in various ways e.g. as an online SLAM task [4, 89, 34], an offline reconstruction task
[29, 73, 79, 39, 56, 55], and lately as a feedforward task [86, 87, 11, 69]. However, most dynamic
SLAM works ignore the dynamic parts [89, 4], only reconstructing the static world, only track rigid
objects [85, 43] or are restricted to object-centric reconstruction [45, 58]. Offline methods typically
separate the reconstruction task into pose estimation followed by reconstruction [55, 56], or are not
scalable to long input videos due to their reliance on global optimization over all past frames [29, 73].
Feed-forward methods train large transformers for online dynamic scene reconstruction, but are yet
to achieve global pose consistency and only produce point clouds [69, 11, 86].
Despite recent progress, existing methods fall short of at least one of the requirements for practical
dynamic scene reconstruction: (1) online operation, tightly coupling pose estimation and dense map
reconstruction for scalability; (2) global pose and map consistency; (3) expressive representations
like 3DGS [23] for detailed appearance and geometry; and (4) flexibility to handle both RGB and
RGB-D input. SLAM systems often ignore dynamics or lack detail; feedforward methods trade
consistency and accuracy for speed; and offline methods are challenging to scale.
We propose ProDyG1, a method for Progressive, Dynamic scene reconstruction with Gaussians from
monocular input, that meets all four criteria. Our contributions are:
1Pronounced “Prodigy”.
Preprint.
arXiv:2509.17864v1  [cs.CV]  22 Sep 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
ProDyG
Online RGB Stream
t
Camera Tracking & Dynamic Scene Reconstruction
Legend
Est. Camera Trajectory
Dyn. Gaussian 
Trajectories
Figure 1: ProDyG: Given an online RGB stream, ProDyG robustly tracks the camera and progres-
sively reconstructs the static background and the dynamic foreground using 3D Gaussian Splat-
ting [23] (3DGS). ProDyG reconstructs dynamic scenes with high-quality novel view synthesis, by
fusing observations from different timestamps into a consistent dynamic 3DGS [23] representation
with Motion Scaffolds [29]. On the right, we show a rendering from a novel view overlaid with the
estimated camera trajectory and dynamic Gaussian trajectories.
• A motion mask prediction strategy, using dynamic flow and refined with semantic point
prompting [50]. This is integrated into the SLAM backend for robust pose estimation.
• An online dynamic reconstruction pipeline that uses Motion Scaffolds [29] to propagate
3DGS in space and time.
• Support for both RGB and RGB-D, with ProDyG as the first online RGB-only method.
• Competitive novel view synthesis results against state-of-the-art offline methods.
2
Related Work
Dynamic Dense SLAM. Dynamic dense SLAM methods mainly address two scenarios: filtering
dynamic content to reconstruct only static environments [4, 13, 90, 89, 77, 19, 15, 81, 44, 5, 74, 59, 48,
57, 82, 37, 32, 88, 1, 24, 7, 64, 26, 72, 51], or explicitly tracking and reconstructing dynamic objects
alongside static structures [85, 3, 43, 17, 52, 53, 78, 14, 45, 58, 8, 65, 34, 35, 31]. Basic strategies for
handling dynamic elements include outlier filtering, robust loss functions [90, 44, 5], or covariance
scaling [1], but these fail with extensive dynamic content. Instead, a motion mask is estimated with
optical flow [88, 82], semantic segmentation [26, 14, 35, 57, 4, 33, 77, 51, 81, 74, 85, 59, 72, 53] or a
combination of the two [34, 19, 15, 52], with uncertainty-guided loss functions [89, 37], with motion
segmentation networks [57], point tracking [65], unsupervised clustering [17] or via conditional
random fields [32]. In many real-world scenarios, reconstructing dynamic objects is critical. Some
traditional works track rigid dynamic content during SLAM [85, 3, 43, 17, 52, 53, 78, 14] or
perform object-centric non-rigid reconstruction [45, 58, 8]. While the above-mentioned methods
can reconstruct dynamic point clouds [4, 85, 74, 59, 88, 17], surfels [52, 53], oct-trees [81] or
signed distance functions [48, 45, 58, 8], they struggle to model photometric details and lighting
effects needed for scene understanding and photorealistic rendering. In response, neural implicit
methods [33, 77, 51, 19] have been proposed, but they are too slow for real-time SLAM. Dynamic
3DGS [23] SLAM has emerged as a solution [15, 34, 35, 31, 89, 32, 72, 26] with concurrent works
such as DynaGSLAM [34] using dynamic scene flow from optical flow to update the Gaussian
means, [65] adapts [79] to the online setting and [35] uses an MLP to deform the dynamic parts.
These works cannot handle pure RGB input. For a recent survey on dynamic SLAM, we refer to [71].
Dynamic 3D Reconstruction. Dynamic 3D reconstruction shares many similarities with dynamic
SLAM, but videos are processed offline [29, 73, 79, 9, 21, 80, 27, 28, 36, 40, 41, 49, 60, 84, 2, 16,
39, 25, 91, 18, 38, 68]. These works typically implement a strategy for deforming dynamic content
over time. Some optimize a deformation field via an MLP [2, 60, 40, 80, 25, 73], use motion basis
functions [16, 49, 68, 36, 29, 28, 27, 21, 39, 18], or extend 3D Gaussian Splatting [23] with a time
attribute [79, 9]. Due to the ill-posed nature of dynamic reconstruction, strong priors are commonly
used, such as point trackers, optical flow, and regularizers like as-rigid-as-possible (ARAP), constant
velocity, and acceleration [29, 41, 56, 68, 39]. Inductive biases also help, such as MLP smoothness
2

<!-- page 3 -->
Reconstruction
Dynamic
Static
Tracking
Non-Keyframes based
Keyframes based
Input
Online RGB-Video
Keyframe
Selection
DBA
RAFT
Optical Flow
Conﬁdence 
Weights       
Disparity
Camera 
Poses      
Normalized Mean
Residual Flow       
Keyframes
Thresholding
Coarse Motion
Mask        
Conf. Weight 
Suppression
Map Deformation
&
Photometric 
Optimization
SAM2 
Motion Mask Loss
Geometry 
Optimization
&
Photometric 
Optimization
Non-Keyframe Camera Poses & Depths
Keyframes
Non-Keyframe
DBA
Depth
Reprojection
Monocular
Depth
Model
Depth
Camera 
Poses      
CoTracker3
2D
Tracks
2D Tracks to 3D Tracks Lifting
Non-Keyframes
Motion 
Scaﬀolds
+
Dynamic 
Gaussians
+
optimized Motion Scaﬀolds
optimized Dynamic Gaussians
optimized Static Gaussians
Fine Motion
 Mask       
Fixed models
Optimization Layers
Algorithms
Figure 2: ProDyG Architecture. We achieve motion-agnostic online tracking by leveraging [54]
to first create keyframe-based coarse motion masks, from which we seed prompts for SAM2 to
distill per-frame fine-grained masks. ProDyG processes batches of frames incrementally, employing
a keyframe selection similar to [54]. Static background is reconstructed by optimizing the static
set of Gaussians with proxy depth maps [54]. For dynamic reconstruction, we attach Gaussians to
Motion Scaffolds [29], which are initialized by lifting 2D tracks to 3D, to encode a dense motion field.
Subsequent to a final geometric and photometric optimization, the Motion Scaffolds and dynamic
Gaussians are extended temporally when a new batch of images arrives.
and continuity, or selecting a sparse set of motion bases. While some of these works use SLAM for
pose estimation, reconstruction is a post-processing step [55, 56].
Feed-forward Methods. Feed-forward methods inspired by DUSt3R [70] and MASt3R [30] have
been proposed to solve dynamic 3D reconstruction. These works rely on large-scale training of
transformer networks and can infer pointmaps from dynamic input image pairs [86, 87, 11, 13, 6, 69].
However, they typically entangle static and dynamic points [69, 86], meaning that the motion of
dynamic points cannot be tracked over time. In concurrent work, [11, 13, 87] propose to enable
3D correspondence estimation of dynamic 3D points. DAS3R [75] learns to predict motion masks
building on MonST3R [86], and only predicts the static world, using 3DGS [23]. Common to all
feed-forward methods is that they process the video either in image pairs or in a sliding window,
without guaranteeing global pose and map consistency, contrary to SLAM. In contrast, we perform
globally consistent and online dynamic reconstruction using SLAM.
3
Method
ProDyG is an online dynamic dense mapping and tracking system that robustly tracks a monocular
camera (sec. 3.1) while also reconstructing and disentangling the static and dynamic parts (sec. 3.3)
with a 3D Gaussian Splatting representation (sec. 3.2). For an overview, see fig. 2.
3.1
Motion-Agnostic Online Camera Tracking
Flow-Based Robust Camera Tracking. We employ Splat-SLAM [54] as our tracking backend,
i.e. we maintain a factor graph storing camera extrinsics ωi, disparity estimates di ∈R(H×W )×1
per keyframe (node) i, and optical flow ˜pij −pi ∈R(H×W ×2)×1 per edge (i, j), where pi is the
flattened pixel grid from keyframe i, and ˜pij represents the flattened predicted pixel coordinates when
pi is projected into keyframe j using optical flow. We also store the confidence wij ∈R(H×W )×1
associated with the optical flow. Tracking is achieved following Dense Bundle Adjustment (DBA)
[66], where the keyframe poses ω and disparities d are optimized with a reprojection error:
arg min
ω,d
X
(i,j)∈E
∥˜pij −pij∥2
Σ′
ij , pij = Kω−1
j (ωi(1/di)K−1[pi, 1]T ), Σ′
ij = diag(wij ¯Ci).
(1)
3

<!-- page 4 -->
(a) Input Image
(b) Mean Mag. ¯ri
of Residual Flow
(c) Coarse Motion Mask (d) Fine Motion Mask
Figure 3: Semantic-guided Motion Mask Refinement. The flow magnitude ¯ri (b) is thresholded to
yield (c). Point prompts from (c) are used as input to SAM2 [50] to yield the fine motion masks (d).
Here, E are the edges of a local factor graph, applied in a sliding window manner, K is the camera
intrinsics, ∥· ∥Σ′
ij denotes the Mahalanobis distance with confidence weights suppressed by a coarse
binary motion mask Ci, defined as 1 where motion is detected and ¯Ci stands for negation of Ci.
We generate the coarse motion masks {Ci} as follows. After each DBA iteration, we compute the
residual flow ˆrij = (˜pij −pi) −(pij −pi) = ˜pij −pij by subtracting the camera-induced flow
pij −pi from the estimated optical flow ˜pij −pi. This residual is near zero in static regions and
larger in dynamic ones. Dynamic areas are identified by evaluating the normalized mean magnitude
¯ri(x, y) of ˆrij over the connected target keyframes Ni for each keyframe i
¯ri(x, y) =
1
|Ni|
X
j∈Ni
∥ˆrij(x, y)∥
1
HW
P
x′,y′ ∥˜pij(x′, y′) −pi(x′, y′)∥.
(2)
For each keyframe, Ci is computed by thresholding ¯ri(x, y) at the top 20%, assigning zero weight to
potentially dynamic regions during DBA. As ¯ri(x, y) is updated each DBA iteration, it is progressively
refined, enabling robust pose estimation in dynamic environments.
Semantic-Guided Motion Mask Refinement. To improve the separation of dynamic and static
regions for reconstruction (sec. 3.3), we use SAM2 [50] to generate fine-grained motion masks for
every frame. We show an example visualization of the input image, the mean magnitude ¯ri of the
residual flow, the coarse motion mask, and the fine motion mask in fig. 3.
Our approach has two phases: initialization and incremental prediction. During initialization, we
generate fine motion masks by prompting SAM2 at the centroids of connected regions in the median-
filtered coarse masks Ci. During incremental prediction, we extend existing object-wise masks into
new frames and add new segmentations based on the coarse masks. We validate each segmentation by
counting prompt point candidates to filter false positives. Before this phase, we adjust the threshold
(top 20% at initialization) based on the dynamic pixel ratio in the latest fine motion mask, adapting to
sequence-specific motion. Detailed algorithms are in the supplemental material.
With the fine motion masks {Mi}, we further enhance our tracking robustness by replacing the coarse
mask Ci with the fine during DBA (eq. (1)) as Σ′
ij = diag(wij(1 −Mi)). This semantic-guided
approach provides more accurate exclusion of dynamic distractors for subsequent iterations of DBA,
including local BA, global BA and loop BA [54].
3.2
Static and Dynamic Map Representation
We represent the scene map G = {Gs, Gd(t)} as a set of 3D Gaussians [23], split into static Gs =
{gi}Ns
i=1 and time-varying dynamic components Gd(t) = {gi(t)}Nd
i=1. Each Gaussian—whether static
or dynamic—is parameterized by a mean µi ∈R3, rotation matrix Ri ∈R3×3, scale si ∈R3,
opacity oi ∈[0, 1], and RGB color ci ∈R3. Rendering is performed by first projecting the 3D
Gaussians onto the image plane, approximated as 2D Gaussians. The 2D opacity at a pixel p is then
αi(p) = oi exp

−1
2(p −µ′
i)⊤Σ
′−1
i
(p −µ′
i)

,
(3)
where µ′
i = Kω−1µi with ω the camera-to-world pose, K the camera intrinsics, and Σ
′
i =
PΣiP ⊤= P(RiSiS⊤
i R⊤
i )P ⊤, with Si = diag(si) and P the affine projection [92]. Given the pose
4

<!-- page 5 -->
ω, we render a pixel p following the 3DGS [23] pipeline for RGB images C, RaDe-GS [83] for depth
maps Dr, and additionally compute opacity maps O as
C(p) =
X
i∈K
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1−αj),
Dr(p) =
X
i∈K
ˆdiαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1−αj),
O(p) =
X
i∈K
αi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1−αj). (4)
Here, K is the set of Gaussians projected to p. We use the unbiased RaDe-GS rasterizer, which
replaces the z-buffer depth with ˆdi, the ray–Gaussian intersection depth along the viewing ray.
3.3
Progressive Dynamic Scene Reconstruction
We propose a progressive approach to dynamic scene reconstruction, which enables online processing
and allows the system to adapt to the continuously evolving scene geometry and camera motion.
ProDyG uses the same keyframe selection strategy as in Splat-SLAM [54], and the addition of new
keyframes triggers progressive reconstruction of both static and dynamic regions. To achieve global
map consistency, we apply 3DGS map deformations for static regions followed by photometric
optimization as in [54]. For dynamic Gaussians, we extend the Motion Scaffold representation [29]
to handle incremental updates. Next, we review the necessary steps.
Non-Keyframe Camera Poses and Depths. Dynamic scene reconstruction benefits from tempo-
rally dense supervision to capture smooth motion, yet the SLAM backend [54] operates on sparse
keyframes for efficiency. To bridge this gap, we derive the camera poses and depth maps for
non-keyframes that exist between keyframes.
To obtain non-keyframe camera poses, we follow the practice of DROID-SLAM [66]. For each non-
keyframe Ft positioned between two neighboring keyframes Ft1 and Ft2, we construct a temporary
local graph with edges connecting both keyframes to Ft. We then execute the recurrent update operator
and the Dense Bundle Adjustment (DBA) layer on this graph, which optimizes the non-keyframe
poses based on the already optimized keyframe poses.
For non-keyframe depth estimation, we leverage reprojection from neighboring keyframes. Given a
non-keyframe Ft with its derived camera-to-world pose ωt and neighboring keyframes Ft1 and Ft2
with poses ωt1 and ωt2, we first back-project the pixels of both keyframes into 3D:
p3D
t1 (pt1) = ωt1(1/dt1)K−1[pt1, 1]T , p3D
t2 (pt2) = ωt2(1/dt2)K−1[pt2, 1]T ,
(5)
where K is the camera intrinsic matrix, and dt1 and dt2 are the disparities of keyframes Ft1 and Ft2,
respectively. We then reproject all back-projected 3D points p3D
t1,t2 = p3D
t1 ∪p3D
t2 from both keyframes
to the camera of the non-keyframe Ft and record their distance to the camera along the z-axis:
p3D
t
= ω−1
t
p3D
t1,t2 , pt = Kp3D
t
, Drepro
t
(pt) = (p3D
t )z .
(6)
We filter out points that are back-projected from dynamic pixels or using invalid disparity estimates
(determined by a multi-view consistency check as in [54]). Using the remaining reprojected 2D
coordinates and their corresponding depth values, we bilinearly interpolate to create a reprojection
depth map Drepro
t
. Finally, to get dense depth, we align a monocular depth estimate Dmono
t
with Drepro
t
by estimating scale θt and shift γt parameters through least squares fitting:
θt, γt = arg min
θ,γ
X
(u,v)
 (θDmono
t
(u, v) + γ) −Drepro
t
(u, v)
2 , Daligned
t
= θtDmono
t
+ γt .
(7)
Motion Scaffolds. We adopt Motion Scaffolds [29] (MoSca) as our dynamic representation. MoSca a
structured graph (Vd, Ed) representing the underlying motion of the scene, where each node v(m) ∈Vd
encodes the motion trajectory of a specific region. Each MoSca node v(m) is defined as
v(m) = ([Q(m)
1
, Q(m)
2
, . . . , Q(m)
T
], r(m)) ,
(8)
where Q(m)
t
∈SE(3) represents the per-timestep rigid transformation at time t, and r(m) is an RBF
radius parameterizing the node’s influence. These nodes are initially anchored by lifting 2D pixel
trajectories using the estimated camera poses ωt and depth maps Daligned
t
computed in eq. (7).
5

<!-- page 6 -->
Similar to the static map deformation [54], we also deform the dynamic Gaussians to reflect the
continuously updated pose and depth estimates from the SLAM backend. Each dynamic Gaussian is
defined relative to a MoSca node (not in world coordinates) and by re-anchoring the MoSca nodes,
the dynamic Gaussians are updated accordingly. The MoSca nodes are re-anchored in 3D when new
pose and depth updates are available. Thus, ProDyG achieves global dynamic map consistency prior
to optimization. This ensures better convergence and consistency between the static and dynamic
components of the scene.
Following MoSca [29], the set of dynamic Gaussians Gd(t) at any query timestamp t is formed by
warping each individual Gaussian gi(tref
i ) = (µi, Ri, si, oi, ci; tref
i , ∆wi) from its reference timestamp
tref
i (the timestamp where it is initialized) to t
Gd(t) = {(Ti(t)µi, Ti(t)Ri, si, oi, ci | Ti(t) = W(µi, w(µi) + ∆wi; tref
i , t)}Nd
i=1 ,
(9)
Here, w(·) is the base RBF skinning weight parametrized by {r(m)}m∈Ed(m∗), where the neighbor-
hood Ed(m∗) consists of the nearest MoSca node v(m∗) and all nodes connected to v(m∗), and ∆wi
are learnable per-Gaussian skinning weight corrections. The warping function W(·) is computed
using Dual Quaternion Blending (DQB) [22]:
W(x, w; tsrc, tdst) = DQB

{wm, ∆Q(m)}m∈Ed(m∗)

,
(10)
where ∆Q(m) = Q(m)
tdst(Q(m)
tsrc)−1 is the relative transformation between tsrc and tdst for node m.
Progressive Construction of Motion Scaffolds. After the initial bootstrapping phase of the SLAM
backend, we initialize the Motion Scaffolds and dynamic Gaussians. First, we employ CoTracker3
[20] to generate dense long-term 2D pixel trajectories within the fine motion masks {Mi} (sec. 3.1)
and corresponding per-timestamp visibility labels. Similar to [29], these 2D trajectories are first
lifted into 3D space at visible timestamps using the camera poses and depth maps estimated by the
backend, while we linearly interpolate between nearby observations at invisible timestamps. Finally,
we sample a subset of the lifted 3D tracks to serve as the initial positions for the MoSca nodes.
Subsequently, we carry out geometry optimization on the initialized MoSca nodes as described in
[29] to infer rotations and positions of invisible nodes, minimizing the as-rigid-as-possible (ARAP)
loss, velocity consistency loss and acceleration consistency loss.
After the geometry optimization of the Motion Scaffolds, we initialize the dynamic Gaussians
at 3D positions obtained by back-projecting pixels within the fine motion masks. Finally, we
perform a photometric optimization of both the Motion Scaffolds and the dynamic Gaussians using
a combination of losses following [29]: an RGB loss Lrgb that enforces color consistency, a depth
loss Ldepth that aligns rendered depth Dr with the aligned monocular depth Daligned (eq. (7)), a track
loss Ltrack that ensures consistent motion with the 2D trajectories, and the aforementioned ARAP,
velocity, and acceleration losses for geometric regularization. In addition to [29], we introduce a
novel motion mask loss that penalizes the rendered opacity of dynamic Gaussians at pixels identified
as static by the motion masks
Lmask =
1
|Pstatic
t
|
X
p∈Pstatic
t
O(p) ,
(11)
where Pstatic
t
is the set of static pixels at timestamp t given by negating the motion mask Mt, and O(p)
is the accumulated opacity of dynamic Gaussians at pixel p (eq. (4)). This loss effectively prevents
dynamic Gaussians from overflowing into static regions, maintaining a clean separation between
static and dynamic components of the scene.
As more frames become available, we extend our dynamic reconstruction. For each new frame batch,
we run CoTracker3 [20] in a temporal window of the new frame batch and an 8-frame overlap with
previously processed frames to ensure continuity in the reconstruction. First, we identify “recently
visible” tracks as those marked as visible for at least 4 frames within the 8 overlapping frames and
extend them into the new frame batch. These extended 2D tracks are then lifted into 3D using the
latest camera pose and depth estimates. To identify newly visible dynamic regions, we back-project
6

<!-- page 7 -->
all pixels within the fine motion masks of the new frames into 3D and perform a spherical search
to determine whether each back-projected point has at least one lifted 3D track within a predefined
radius rsearch. Pixels without nearby 3D tracks are marked as “newly-seen”, representing previously
unobserved portions of dynamic objects. To capture these newly-seen regions, we execute a second
run of the point tracker, specifically querying newly-seen pixels. Finally, we run a third tracking pass
within the entire dynamic regions of the new frames to replenish the density of visible 2D tracks.
This multi-stage tracking strategy ensures dense coverage of all dynamic elements in the scene.
Within the new temporal window, all extended and newly added 2D tracks are lifted into 3D using
the same procedure as during initialization. For temporal consistency, we warp new tracks to past
timestamps with DQB (Eqn.10), using Motion Scaffolds from the previous update. This leverages the
latest photometric optimization to guide newly-seen 3D tracks through past frames despite invisibility.
We initialize dynamic Gaussians only at newly-seen pixels, then jointly optimize geometry and
appearance over the expanded MoSca and dynamic Gaussians using the same losses as during
initialization.
4
Experiments
4.1
Experimental Setup
Implementation Details. All experiments were conducted on a cluster with an AMD EPYC 7H12
or 7742 CPU and an NVIDIA A6000 GPU. The kernel size of the median filter used to denoise the
coarse motion masks is 5 × 5. The spherical search radius for “newly-seen” pixel identification is
rsearch = 0.02m. For geometry and photometric optimization, we keep our loss weights identical with
those applied in MoSca [29], and set λmask = 1 as the weight of Lmask. For more implementation
details, we refer to the supplemental material.
Datasets. We evaluate our camera tracking on the Bonn RGB-D Dynamic Dataset [47] and the TUM
RGB-D Dataset [62] (dynamic scenes). Since existing works report tracking results on different sets
of sequences, we select four mostly used sequences from each dataset to evaluate our method. For
rendering, we report novel view synthesis (NVS) results both qualitatively and quantitatively on the
iPhone dataset [12]. To align with Shape of Motion [68], we evaluate our method and all baselines
on the 5 sequences used in [68] with the 2x downsampled image resolution. For a fair comparison,
we use the preprocessed motion masks given by [68] for all our experiments on the iPhone Dataset.
Baselines. For tracking, we compare with various works on RGB and RGB-D SLAM. The main
baseline is Splat-SLAM [54] since we base our tracking pipeline on it. For rendering, the baseline
methods are NVS-capable monocular Gaussian-based dynamic reconstruction methods including
Shape of Motion [68], DynOMo [56], MoSca [29] and Gaussian Marbles [61].
Metrics. For tracking, we evaluate ATE RMSE [cm] [63] after aligning the estimated camera
trajectory with the ground truth via Umeyama alignment [67]. For NVS, we report PSNR, SSIM and
LPIPS evaluated within the covisibility masks provided by [12] and averaged over all novel views.
4.2
Tracking
In tab. 1, we evaluate tracking performance on the Bonn RGB-D Dynamic Dataset [47] and the TUM
RGB-D Dataset [62]. For both datasets, ProDyG performs competitively among all the RGB-D and
RGB SLAM works and shows a significant advantage over the main baseline Splat-SLAM [54]. This
improvement validates the effectiveness of our motion-agnostic camera tracking method introduced
in sec. 3.1. WildGS-SLAM [89] is the only baseline method to outperform ProDyG on both datasets.
Since both methods build upon the tracking framework of Splat-SLAM [54], we attribute this
performance gap to two key factors: (1) WildGS-SLAM employs a test-time-optimized MLP that
produces soft uncertainty masks to suppress confidence weights. As it reconstructs only the static
background, it can aggressively suppress regions beyond actual dynamic object boundaries (e.g.
moving shadows) without degrading mapping quality. In contrast, ProDyG prioritizes accurate
dynamic reconstruction and therefore requires motion masks with precise boundaries, which may
miss some effective distractors. (2) WildGS-SLAM benefits from additional DINOv2 [46] features
and on-the-fly training of the uncertainty MLP at the cost of higher computational complexity, while
the primary computational overhead of our tracking approach comes from SAM2 [50] inference.
7

<!-- page 8 -->
Method
Type
Bonn RGB-D Dynamic Dataset [47]
TUM RGB-D Dataset [62]
Ball
Ball2
Pers
Pers2
Avg.
f3/ws
f3/wx
f3/wr
f3/whs
Avg.
RGB-D Input
ORB-SLAM2 [44]
S
6.5
23.0
6.9
7.9
11.1
40.8
72.2
80.5
72.3
66.45
NICE-SLAM [90]
S
24.4
20.2
24.5
53.6
30.7
79.8
86.5
244.0
152.0
140.57
ReFusion [48]
R
17.5
25.4
28.9
46.3
29.5
1.7
9.9
40.6
10.4
15.7
DynaSLAM (N+G) [4]
R
3.0
2.9
6.1
7.8
5.0
0.6
1.5
3.5
2.5
2.03
DG-SLAM [76]
R
3.7
4.1
4.5
6.9
4.8
0.6
1.6
4.3
-
-
RoDyn-SLAM [19]
R
7.9
11.5
14.5
13.8
11.9
1.7
8.3
-
5.6
-
DDN-SLAM (RGB-D) [33]
R
1.8
4.1
4.3
3.8
3.5
1.0
1.4
3.9
2.3
2.15
RGB Input
DSO [10]
S
7.3
21.8
30.6
26.5
21.6
1.5
12.9
13.8
40.7
17.23
DROID-SLAM [66]
S
7.5
4.1
4.3
5.4
5.3
1.2
1.6
4.0
2.2
2.25
MonoGS [42]
S
15.3
17.3
26.4
35.2
23.6
1.1
21.5
17.4
44.2
21.05
Splat-SLAM [54]
S
8.8
3.0
4.9
25.8
10.6
2.3
1.3
3.9
2.2
2.43
DDN-SLAM (RGB) [33]
R
-
-
-
-
-
2.5
2.8
8.9
4.1
4.58
MegaSaM [37]
R
3.7
2.6
4.1
4.0
3.6
0.6
1.5
2.6
1.8
1.63
WildGS-SLAM [89]
R
2.7
2.4
3.6
3.1
2.94
0.4
1.3
3.3
1.6
1.63
DynaMoN (MS) [55]
D
6.8
3.8
2.4
3.5
4.1
1.4
1.4
3.9
2.0
2.18
DynaMoN (MS&SS) [55]
D
2.8
2.7
14.8
2.2
5.6
0.7
1.4
3.9
1.9
1.98
D4DGS-SLAM∗[65]
D
3.6
3.9
4.5
5.2
4.3
-
-
-
-
-
4D-GS SLAM∗[35]
D
2.4
3.7
8.9
9.4
6.1
0.5
2.1
2.6
-
-
ProDyG (Ours)
D
2.7
2.6
4.9
2.9
3.29
1.6
1.2
3.0
1.7
1.89
Table 1: Tracking Performance on Bonn RGB-D Dynamic Dataset [47] and TUM RGB-D
Dataset [62]. (ATE RMSE ↓[cm]). Best results are highlighted as first , second , third and
concurrent works with∗. We take the numbers from [89] except [89, 65, 35]. We categorize each
method into static reconstruction (S), robust against dynamics (R) and producing a globally consistent
dynamic model (D). ProDyG is competitive with WildGS-SLAM [89] and MegaSaM [37] while
explicitly reconstructing a consistent dynamic model, contrary to [89, 37].
4.3
Rendering
In tab. 2, we evaluate NVS performance quantitatively on the iPhone Dataset [12]. Notably, we
differentiate the experiment setups of each methods using the checkboxes, whether the reconstruction
or tracking is executed online, and whether the input modalities are RGB only or RGB-D. As shown
in tab. 2, ProDyG outperforms the offline method Shape of Motion [68] in both PSNR and SSIM,
while running both the tracking and dynamic scene reconstruction online. This is a significantly
more difficult task. Compared to MoSca [29], which is an offline method that shares the same
representation of the motion field with our framework, ProDyG shows only minimal disadvantages
when optimized with RGB-D input. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our progressive dynamic
reconstruction. DynOMo [56] is the only method capable of online reconstruction with precomputed
camera poses, and ProDyG shows a significant advantage over DynOMo when tested under the same
constraint. Furthermore, ProDyG still maintains reasonably good performance when only having
access to RGB images, while none of the baseline methods is capable of operating under the same
setting. Finally, we evaluate NVS when estimated poses from the SLAM backend are loaded offline
to the online mapper. The performance is very similar in both RGB-D and RGB-only modes, showing
that our method can find the offline solution, even when optimized in pure online mode.
In fig. 4, we show qualitative comparisons of novel view renderings on the iPhone Dataset [12].
Compared to other methods, DynOMo [56] exhibits worse quality in novel view renderings due to
lack of motion constraints (e.g. 2D point tracking). Therefore, ProDyG is essentially the first method
to support high-quality novel view synthesis of dynamic scenes through online reconstruction from
monocular videos. Due to the motion mask loss (eq. (11)), dynamic objects reconstructed by our
method tend to show more accurate silhouettes than Shape of Motion [68] and MoSca [29].
Limitations. Our dynamic representation struggles with objects that move predominantly outside the
viewing frustum and later reappear, due to insufficient photometric constraints for Motion Scaffolds.
This causes optimization to be dominated by regularization terms, often leading to undesired deforma-
tions. This issue is an inherent limitation also observed in MoSca [29]. Additionally, similar to most
monocular dynamic view synthesis methods, our system requires per-scene test-time optimization,
thereby limiting its applicability in real-time scenarios. Furthermore, ProDyG cannot effectively
handle large changes in novel viewpoints, which would necessitate generative models or data-driven
priors to hallucinate unseen regions. These challenges highlight key directions for future work.
8

<!-- page 9 -->
Shape of
Motion [68] DynOMo [56] MoSca [29]
Gaussian
Marbles [61]
ProDyG
(Ours)
ProDyG
(Ours)
ProDyG
(Ours)
ProDyG
(Ours)
Online Reconstr.
✗
✓
✗
✗
✓
✓
✓
✓
Online Tracking
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✗
✓
RGB-only
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✗
✓
✓
PSNR↑
17.43
11.98
18.44
16.00
17.65
17.87
15.41
15.40
SSIM ↑
0.591
0.436
0.666
-
0.634
0.643
0.603
0.582
LPIPS↓
0.303
0.748
0.311
0.437
0.390
0.377
0.462
0.492
Table 2: Novel View Synthesis Evaluation on iPhone Dataset [12]. All results are averaged over
the 5 sequences evaluated in [68], with the standard 2x downsampling. All methods except [68] are
evaluated without ground truth camera poses. Best results are highlighted as first , second , third .
Our method shows superior PSNR and SSIM over the offline Shape of Motion and falls short of the
state-of-the-art offline method MoSca [29] by a small margin under the extra constraints of online
reconstruction and tracking. When tested with precomputed camera poses, ProDyG outperforms the
only online competitor DynOMo [56] by a significant advantage. Notably, our method still works
reasonably well with RGB-only input while being online.
paper-windmill
apple
DynOMo [56]
SoM [68]
MoSca [29]
ProDyG (Ours)
Ground Truth
Figure 4: Qualitative Novel View Synthesis Results on iPhone [12]. All methods are trained with
access to ground truth depth maps. Dynamic objects reconstructed by our method tend to show more
accurate silhouettes than [68] and [29]. Note that ProDyG is the only one among the methods to
perform both tracking and reconstruction online.
5
Conclusion
We proposed ProDyG, a progressive dynamic 3D reconstruction framework that meets four key criteria
for practical deployment: online operation, global pose and map consistency, detailed appearance
and geometry modeling through 3D Gaussian Splatting, and flexibility to operate with either RGB or
RGB-D input. Our novel flow-based motion-mask prediction integrated with the SLAM backend
enables robust camera tracking in dynamic environments, while our online dynamic reconstruction
pipeline updates and optimizes Motion Scaffolds and dynamic Gaussians in a progressive manner.
Our experiments demonstrate that ProDyG achieves competitive performance in both tracking and
novel view synthesis.
9

<!-- page 10 -->
References
[1] Agarwal, P., Tipaldi, G.D., Spinello, L., Stachniss, C., Burgard, W.: Robust map optimization using
dynamic covariance scaling. In: 2013 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation. pp. 62–69.
Ieee (2013)
[2] Bae, J., Kim, S., Yun, Y., Lee, H., Bang, G., Uh, Y.: Per-gaussian embedding-based deformation for
deformable 3d gaussian splatting. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 321–335. Springer
(2024)
[3] Bescos, B., Campos, C., Tardós, J.D., Neira, J.: Dynaslam ii: Tightly-coupled multi-object tracking and
slam. IEEE robotics and automation letters 6(3), 5191–5198 (2021)
[4] Bescos, B., Fácil, J.M., Civera, J., Neira, J.: Dynaslam: Tracking, mapping, and inpainting in dynamic
scenes. IEEE robotics and automation letters 3(4), 4076–4083 (2018)
[5] Campos, C., Elvira, R., Rodríguez, J.J.G., Montiel, J.M., Tardós, J.D.: Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source
library for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam. IEEE transactions on robotics 37(6), 1874–1890
(2021)
[6] Chen, X., Chen, Y., Xiu, Y., Geiger, A., Chen, A.: Easi3r: Estimating disentangled motion from dust3r
without training. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.24391 (2025)
[7] Dai, W., Zhang, Y., Li, P., Fang, Z., Scherer, S.: Rgb-d slam in dynamic environments using point
correlations. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence 44(1), 373–389 (2020)
[8] Dou, M., Khamis, S., Degtyarev, Y., Davidson, P., Fanello, S.R., Kowdle, A., Escolano, S.O., Rhemann,
C., Kim, D., Taylor, J., et al.: Fusion4d: Real-time performance capture of challenging scenes. ACM
Transactions on Graphics (ToG) 35(4), 1–13 (2016)
[9] Duan, Y., Wei, F., Dai, Q., He, Y., Chen, W., Chen, B.: 4d-rotor gaussian splatting: towards efficient novel
view synthesis for dynamic scenes. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers. pp. 1–11 (2024)
[10] Engel, J., Koltun, V., Cremers, D.: Direct sparse odometry. IEEE transactions on pattern analysis and
machine intelligence 40(3), 611–625 (2017)
[11] Feng, H., Zhang, J., Wang, Q., Ye, Y., Yu, P., Black, M.J., Darrell, T., Kanazawa, A.: St4rtrack: Simultane-
ous 4d reconstruction and tracking in the world. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.13152 (2025)
[12] Gao, H., Li, R., Tulsiani, S., Russell, B., Kanazawa, A.: Dynamic novel-view synthesis: A reality check.
In: NeurIPS (2022)
[13] Han, J., An, H., Jung, J., Narihira, T., Seo, J., Fukuda, K., Kim, C., Hong, S., Mitsufuji, Y., Kim, S.: D2ust3r:
Enhancing 3d reconstruction with 4d pointmaps for dynamic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06264
(2025)
[14] Henein, M., Zhang, J., Mahony, R., Ila, V.: Dynamic slam: The need for speed. In: 2020 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 2123–2129. IEEE (2020)
[15] Hou, C., Yeo, Q.X., Guo, M., Su, Y., Li, Y., Lee, G.H.: Mvgsr: Multi-view consistency gaussian splatting
for robust surface reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.08093 (2025)
[16] Hu, B., Li, Y., Xie, R., Xu, B., Dong, H., Yao, J., Lee, G.H.: Learnable infinite taylor gaussian for dynamic
view rendering. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.04282 (2024)
[17] Huang, J., Yang, S., Zhao, Z., Lai, Y.K., Hu, S.M.: Clusterslam: A slam backend for simultaneous rigid
body clustering and motion estimation. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference on
Computer Vision. pp. 5875–5884 (2019)
[18] Jeong, Y., Lee, J., Choi, H., Cho, M.: Rodygs: Robust dynamic gaussian splatting for casual videos. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.03077 (2024)
[19] Jiang, H., Xu, Y., Li, K., Feng, J., Zhang, L.: Rodyn-slam: Robust dynamic dense rgb-d slam with neural
radiance fields. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (2024)
[20] Karaev, N., Makarov, I., Wang, J., Neverova, N., Vedaldi, A., Rupprecht, C.: Cotracker3: Simpler and
better point tracking by pseudo-labelling real videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.11831 (2024)
[21] Katsumata, K., Vo, D.M., Nakayama, H.: A compact dynamic 3d gaussian representation for real-time
dynamic view synthesis. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 394–412. Springer (2024)
10

<!-- page 11 -->
[22] Kavan, L., Collins, S., Žára, J., O’Sullivan, C.: Skinning with dual quaternions. In: Proceedings of the
2007 symposium on Interactive 3D graphics and games. pp. 39–46 (2007)
[23] Kerbl, B., Kopanas, G., Leimkühler, T., Drettakis, G.: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field
rendering. ACM Trans. Graph. 42(4), 139–1 (2023)
[24] Kim, D.H., Kim, J.H.: Effective background model-based rgb-d dense visual odometry in a dynamic
environment. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 32(6), 1565–1573 (2016)
[25] Kong, H., Yang, X., Wang, X.: Efficient gaussian splatting for monocular dynamic scene rendering via
sparse time-variant attribute modeling. In: Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence.
pp. 4374–4382 (2025)
[26] Kong, M., Lee, J., Lee, S., Kim, E.: Dgs-slam: Gaussian splatting slam in dynamic environment. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2411.10722 (2024)
[27] Kratimenos, A., Lei, J., Daniilidis, K.: Dynmf: Neural motion factorization for real-time dynamic view
synthesis with 3d gaussian splatting. In: European Conference on Computer Vision. pp. 252–269. Springer
(2024)
[28] Lee, J., Won, C., Jung, H., Bae, I., Jeon, H.G.: Fully explicit dynamic gaussian splatting. Advances in
Neural Information Processing Systems 37, 5384–5409 (2024)
[29] Lei, J., Weng, Y., Harley, A., Guibas, L., Daniilidis, K.: Mosca: Dynamic gaussian fusion from casual
videos via 4d motion scaffolds. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.17421 (2024)
[30] Leroy, V., Cabon, Y., Revaud, J.: Grounding image matching in 3d with mast3r. In: European Conference
on Computer Vision. pp. 71–91. Springer (2024)
[31] Li, H., Meng, X., Zuo, X., Liu, Z., Wang, H., Cremers, D.: Pg-slam: Photo-realistic and geometry-aware
rgb-d slam in dynamic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15800 (2024)
[32] Li, M., Chen, W., Cheng, N., Xu, J., Li, D., Wang, H.: Garad-slam: 3d gaussian splatting for real-time anti
dynamic slam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.03228 (2025)
[33] Li, M., Zhou, Y., Jiang, G., Deng, T., Wang, Y., Wang, H.: Ddn-slam: Real-time dense dynamic neural
implicit slam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01545 (2024)
[34] Li, R.B., Shaghaghi, M., Suzuki, K., Liu, X., Moparthi, V., Du, B., Curtis, W., Renschler, M., Lee, K.M.B.,
Atanasov, N., et al.: Dynagslam: Real-time gaussian-splatting slam for online rendering, tracking, motion
predictions of moving objects in dynamic scenes. arXiv preprint arXiv:2503.11979 (2025)
[35] Li, Y., Fang, Y., Zhu, Z., Li, K., Ding, Y., Tombari, F.: 4d gaussian splatting slam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2503.16710 (2025)
[36] Li, Z., Chen, Z., Li, Z., Xu, Y.: Spacetime gaussian feature splatting for real-time dynamic view synthesis.
In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 8508–8520
(2024)
[37] Li, Z., Tucker, R., Cole, F., Wang, Q., Jin, L., Ye, V., Kanazawa, A., Holynski, A., Snavely, N.:
Megasam: Accurate, fast, and robust structure and motion from casual dynamic videos. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2412.04463 (2024)
[38] Liang, H., Ren, J., Mirzaei, A., Torralba, A., Liu, Z., Gilitschenski, I., Fidler, S., Oztireli, C., Ling, H.,
Gojcic, Z., et al.: Feed-forward bullet-time reconstruction of dynamic scenes from monocular videos. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2412.03526 (2024)
[39] Liang, Y., Xu, T., Kikuchi, Y.: Himor: Monocular deformable gaussian reconstruction with hierarchical
motion representation. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.06210 (2025)
[40] Liang, Y., Khan, N., Li, Z., Nguyen-Phuoc, T., Lanman, D., Tompkin, J., Xiao, L.: Gaufre: Gaussian
deformation fields for real-time dynamic novel view synthesis. In: 2025 IEEE/CVF Winter Conference on
Applications of Computer Vision (WACV). pp. 2642–2652. IEEE (2025)
[41] Luiten, J., Kopanas, G., Leibe, B., Ramanan, D.: Dynamic 3d gaussians: Tracking by persistent dynamic
view synthesis. In: 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV). pp. 800–809. IEEE (2024)
[42] Matsuki, H., Murai, R., Kelly, P.H., Davison, A.J.: Gaussian splatting slam. In: Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 18039–18048 (2024)
11

<!-- page 12 -->
[43] Morris, J., Wang, Y., Kliniewski, M., Ila, V.: Dynosam: Open-source smoothing and mapping framework
for dynamic slam. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.11893 (2025)
[44] Mur-Artal, R., Tardós, J.D.: Orb-slam2: An open-source slam system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d
cameras. IEEE transactions on robotics 33(5), 1255–1262 (2017)
[45] Newcombe, R.A., Fox, D., Seitz, S.M.: Dynamicfusion: Reconstruction and tracking of non-rigid scenes
in real-time. In: 2015 Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition.
IEEE (2015)
[46] Oquab, M., Darcet, T., Moutakanni, T., Vo, H., Szafraniec, M., Khalidov, V., Fernandez, P., Haziza, D.,
Massa, F., El-Nouby, A., Assran, M., Ballas, N., Galuba, W., Howes, R., Huang, P.Y., Li, S.W., Misra, I.,
Rabbat, M., Sharma, V., Synnaeve, G., Xu, H., Jegou, H., Mairal, J., Labatut, P., Joulin, A., Bojanowski, P.:
Dinov2: Learning robust visual features without supervision (2024), https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.
07193
[47] Palazzolo, E., Behley, J., Lottes, P., Giguère, P., Stachniss, C.: ReFusion: 3D Reconstruction in Dynamic
Environments for RGB-D Cameras Exploiting Residuals (2019), https://www.ipb.uni-bonn.de/
pdfs/palazzolo2019iros.pdf
[48] Palazzolo, E., Behley, J., Lottes, P., Giguere, P., Stachniss, C.: Refusion: 3d reconstruction in dynamic
environments for rgb-d cameras exploiting residuals. In: 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). pp. 7855–7862. IEEE (2019)
[49] Park, J., Bui, M.Q.V., Bello, J.L.G., Moon, J., Oh, J., Kim, M.: Splinegs: Robust motion-adaptive spline
for real-time dynamic 3d gaussians from monocular video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.09982 (2024)
[50] Ravi, N., Gabeur, V., Hu, Y.T., Hu, R., Ryali, C., Ma, T., Khedr, H., Rädle, R., Rolland, C., Gustafson, L.,
et al.: Sam 2: Segment anything in images and videos. arXiv preprint arXiv:2408.00714 (2024)
[51] Ruan, C., Zang, Q., Zhang, K., Huang, K.: Dn-slam: A visual slam with orb features and nerf mapping in
dynamic environments. IEEE Sensors Journal 24(4), 5279–5287 (2023)
[52] Rünz, M., Agapito, L.: Co-fusion: Real-time segmentation, tracking and fusion of multiple objects. In:
2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). pp. 4471–4478. IEEE (2017)
[53] Runz, M., Buffier, M., Agapito, L.: Maskfusion: Real-time recognition, tracking and reconstruction
of multiple moving objects. In: 2018 IEEE international symposium on mixed and augmented reality
(ISMAR). pp. 10–20. IEEE (2018)
[54] Sandström, E., Tateno, K., Oechsle, M., Niemeyer, M., Van Gool, L., Oswald, M.R., Tombari, F.: Splat-
slam: Globally optimized rgb-only slam with 3d gaussians. arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.16544 (2024)
[55] Schischka, N., Schieber, H., Karaoglu, M.A., Gorgulu, M., Grötzner, F., Ladikos, A., Navab, N., Roth,
D., Busam, B.: Dynamon: Motion-aware fast and robust camera localization for dynamic neural radiance
fields. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters (2024)
[56] Seidenschwarz, J., Zhou, Q., Duisterhof, B., Ramanan, D., Leal-Taixé, L.: Dynomo: Online point tracking
by dynamic online monocular gaussian reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2409.02104 (2024)
[57] Shen, S., Cai, Y., Wang, W., Scherer, S.: Dytanvo: Joint refinement of visual odometry and motion segmen-
tation in dynamic environments. In: 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA). pp. 4048–4055. IEEE (2023)
[58] Slavcheva, M., Baust, M., Cremers, D., Ilic, S.: Killingfusion: Non-rigid 3d reconstruction without
correspondences. In: Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition. pp.
1386–1395 (2017)
[59] Soares, J.C.V., Gattass, M., Meggiolaro, M.A.: Crowd-slam: visual slam towards crowded environments
using object detection. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems 102(2), 50 (2021)
[60] Somraj, N., Choudhary, K., Mupparaju, S.H., Soundararajan, R.: Factorized motion fields for fast sparse
input dynamic view synthesis. In: ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference Papers. pp. 1–12 (2024)
[61] Stearns, C., Harley, A., Uy, M., Dubost, F., Tombari, F., Wetzstein, G., Guibas, L.: Dynamic gaussian
marbles for novel view synthesis of casual monocular videos. In: SIGGRAPH Asia 2024 Conference
Papers. pp. 1–11 (2024)
12

<!-- page 13 -->
[62] Sturm, J., Engelhard, N., Endres, F., Burgard, W., Cremers, D.: A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d
slam systems. In: Proc. of the International Conference on Intelligent Robot Systems (IROS) (Oct 2012)
[63] Sturm, J., Engelhard, N., Endres, F., Burgard, W., Cremers, D.: A benchmark for the evaluation of RGB-D
SLAM systems. In: International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE/RSJ (2012).
https://doi.org/10.1109/IROS.2012.6385773, http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/6385773/
[64] Sun, Y., Liu, M., Meng, M.Q.H.: Improving rgb-d slam in dynamic environments: A motion removal
approach. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 89, 110–122 (2017)
[65] Sun, Z., Lo, J., Hu, J.: Embracing dynamics: Dynamics-aware 4d gaussian splatting slam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2504.04844 (2025)
[66] Teed, Z., Deng, J.: Droid-slam: Deep visual slam for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras. Advances in
neural information processing systems 34, 16558–16569 (2021)
[67] Umeyama, S.: Least-squares estimation of transformation parameters between two point patterns. IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis & Machine Intelligence 13(04), 376–380 (1991)
[68] Wang, Q., Ye, V., Gao, H., Austin, J., Li, Z., Kanazawa, A.: Shape of motion: 4d reconstruction from a
single video. arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.13764 (2024)
[69] Wang, Q., Zhang, Y., Holynski, A., Efros, A.A., Kanazawa, A.: Continuous 3d perception model with
persistent state. arXiv preprint arXiv:2501.12387 (2025)
[70] Wang, S., Leroy, V., Cabon, Y., Chidlovskii, B., Revaud, J.: Dust3r: Geometric 3d vision made easy. In:
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition. pp. 20697–20709
(2024)
[71] Wang, Y., Tian, Y., Chen, J., Xu, K., Ding, X.: A survey of visual slam in dynamic environment: The
evolution from geometric to semantic approaches. IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement
(2024)
[72] Wen, L., Li, S., Zhang, Y., Huang, Y., Lin, J., Pan, F., Bing, Z., Knoll, A.: Gassidy: Gaussian splatting
slam in dynamic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15476 (2024)
[73] Wu, G., Yi, T., Fang, J., Xie, L., Zhang, X., Wei, W., Liu, W., Tian, Q., Wang, X.: 4d gaussian splatting for
real-time dynamic scene rendering. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. pp. 20310–20320 (2024)
[74] Xiao, L., Wang, J., Qiu, X., Rong, Z., Zou, X.: Dynamic-slam: Semantic monocular visual localization
and mapping based on deep learning in dynamic environment. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 117,
1–16 (2019)
[75] Xu, K., Tse, T.H.E., Peng, J., Yao, A.: Das3r: Dynamics-aware gaussian splatting for static scene
reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2412.19584 (2024)
[76] Xu, Y., Jiang, H., Xiao, Z., Feng, J., Zhang, L.: Dg-slam: Robust dynamic gaussian splatting slam with
hybrid pose optimization. arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.08373 (2024)
[77] Xu, Z., Niu, J., Li, Q., Ren, T., Chen, C.: Nid-slam: Neural implicit representation-based rgb-d slam in
dynamic environments. In: 2024 IEEE International Conference on Multimedia and Expo (ICME). pp. 1–6.
IEEE (2024)
[78] Yang, S., Scherer, S.: Cubeslam: Monocular 3-d object slam. IEEE Transactions on Robotics 35(4),
925–938 (2019)
[79] Yang, Z., Yang, H., Pan, Z., Zhang, L.: Real-time photorealistic dynamic scene representation and rendering
with 4d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.10642 (2023)
[80] Yang, Z., Gao, X., Zhou, W., Jiao, S., Zhang, Y., Jin, X.: Deformable 3d gaussians for high-fidelity
monocular dynamic scene reconstruction. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision
and pattern recognition. pp. 20331–20341 (2024)
[81] Yu, C., Liu, Z., Liu, X.J., Xie, F., Yang, Y., Wei, Q., Fei, Q.: Ds-slam: A semantic visual slam towards
dynamic environments. In: 2018 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems
(IROS). pp. 1168–1174. IEEE (2018)
[82] Yu, X., Ye, W., Guo, X., Ming, Y., Li, J., Bao, H., Cui, Z., Zhang, G.: D3flowslam: Self-supervised
dynamic slam with flow motion decomposition and dino guidance. arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08794 (2022)
13

<!-- page 14 -->
[83] Zhang, B., Fang, C., Shrestha, R., Liang, Y., Long, X., Tan, P.: Rade-gs: Rasterizing depth in gaussian
splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2406.01467 (2024)
[84] Zhang, D., Li, G., Li, J., Bressieux, M., Hilliges, O., Pollefeys, M., Van Gool, L., Wang, X.: Egogaus-
sian: Dynamic scene understanding from egocentric video with 3d gaussian splatting. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2406.19811 (2024)
[85] Zhang, J., Henein, M., Mahony, R., Ila, V.: Vdo-slam: A visual dynamic object-aware slam system. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2005.11052 (2020)
[86] Zhang, J., Herrmann, C., Hur, J., Jampani, V., Darrell, T., Cole, F., Sun, D., Yang, M.H.: Monst3r: A
simple approach for estimating geometry in the presence of motion. arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.03825
(2024)
[87] Zhang, S., Ge, Y., Tian, J., Xu, G., Chen, H., Lv, C., Shen, C.: Pomato: Marrying pointmap matching with
temporal motion for dynamic 3d reconstruction. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.05692 (2025)
[88] Zhang, T., Zhang, H., Li, Y., Nakamura, Y., Zhang, L.: Flowfusion: Dynamic dense rgb-d slam based on
optical flow. In: 2020 IEEE international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA). pp. 7322–7328.
IEEE (2020)
[89] Zheng, J., Zhu, Z., Bieri, V., Pollefeys, M., Peng, S., Armeni, I.: Wildgs-slam: Monocular gaussian
splatting slam in dynamic environments. arXiv preprint arXiv:2504.03886 (2025)
[90] Zhu, Z., Peng, S., Larsson, V., Xu, W., Bao, H., Cui, Z., Oswald, M.R., Pollefeys, M.: Nice-slam: Neural
implicit scalable encoding for slam. In: Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition. pp. 12786–12796 (2022)
[91] Zou, Z., Qu, Z., Peng, X., Boominathan, V., Pediredla, A., Chakravarthula, P.: High-speed dynamic 3d
imaging with sensor fusion splatting. arXiv preprint arXiv:2502.04630 (2025)
[92] Zwicker, M., Pfister, H., Van Baar, J., Gross, M.: Surface splatting. In: Proceedings of the 28th annual
conference on Computer graphics and interactive techniques. pp. 371–378 (2001)
14
