<!-- page 1 -->
1
OmniMap: A General Mapping Framework
Integrating Optics, Geometry, and Semantics
Yinan Deng, Yufeng Yue∗, Jianyu Dou, Jingyu Zhao, Jiahui Wang, Yujie Tang, Yi Yang, and Mengyin Fu
OmniMap
Metrics
Scene Q&A
Interactive Editing
Perception-guided Manipulation
Map-assisted Navigation
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
1
2
3DGS Field
Open-vocabulary Voxels
Color Mesh
Geometric Mesh
5.55 fps
5.55 fps
The distance is 2.29 m.
The distance is 2.29 m.
 The bed has a pillow, a white 
sheet, and a green blanket on it.
 The bed has a pillow, a white 
sheet, and a green blanket on it.
Optic - Geometry
Semantic - Semantic
Render: View 1
Render: View 2
Fig. 1: We introduce OmniMap, a general online mapping framework integrating optics, geometry, and semantics. OmniMap incrementally
maintains an open-vocabulary instance-level voxel representation and a 3DGS (3D Gaussian Splatting) representation, from which color and
geometric meshes are derived. OmniMap supports multi-modal rendering (RGB / depth / normal / instance), and achieves state-of-the-art
performance in rendering fidelity, mesh quality, and semantic understanding. This holistic framework enables versatile support for a wide
range of downstream applications.
Abstract—Robotic systems demand accurate and comprehen-
sive 3D environment perception, requiring simultaneous capture
of photo-realistic appearance (optical), precise layout shape (ge-
ometric), and open-vocabulary scene understanding (semantic).
Existing methods typically achieve only partial fulfillment of these
requirements while exhibiting optical blurring, geometric irreg-
ularities, and semantic ambiguities. To address these challenges,
we propose OmniMap. Overall, OmniMap represents the first
online mapping framework that simultaneously captures optical,
geometric, and semantic scene attributes while maintaining real-
time performance and model compactness. At the architectural
This work is supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of
China under Grant 92370203, 62473050, 62233002, Beijing Natural Science
Foundation Undergraduate Research Program QY24180. (Corresponding Au-
thor: Yufeng Yue)
Yinan
Deng,
Yufeng
Yue,
Jianyu
Dou,
Jingyu
Zhao,
Jiahui
Wang,
Yujie
Tang,
and
Yi
Yang
are
with
School
of
Automation,
Beijing
Institute
of
Technology,
Beijing
100081,
China
(e-mail:
dengyinan@bit.edu.cn; yueyufeng@bit.edu.cn; BruceDou030806@163.com;
unique zhao0210@163.com;
wjh@bit.edu.cn;
3120235697@bit.edu.cn;
yang yi@bit.edu.cn).
Mengyin Fu is with the School of Automation, Beijing Institute of
Technology, Beijing 100081, China, and the School of Automation, Nanjing
University of Science and Technology, Nanjing 210018, China (e-mail:
fumy@bit.edu.cn).
The project page of OmniMap is available at https://omni-map.github.io/.
Accepted by IEEE Transactions on Robotics (TRO)
level, OmniMap employs a tightly coupled 3DGS–Voxel hybrid
representation that combines fine-grained modeling with struc-
tural stability. At the implementation level, OmniMap identifies
key challenges across different modalities and introduces several
innovations: adaptive camera modeling for motion blur and
exposure compensation, hybrid incremental representation with
normal constraints, and probabilistic fusion for robust instance-
level understanding. Extensive experiments show OmniMap’s
superior performance in rendering fidelity, geometric accuracy,
and zero-shot semantic segmentation compared to state-of-the-
art methods across diverse scenes. The framework’s versatility
is further evidenced through a variety of downstream applica-
tions, including multi-domain scene Q&A, interactive editing,
perception-guided manipulation, and map-assisted navigation.
Index Terms—Open-vocabulary, Gaussian Splatting, Mapping,
RGB-D perception
I. INTRODUCTION
The quality of a robot’s 3D environmental representation,
measured by its accuracy and dimensionality, fundamentally
impacts the robot’s task operational performance and exe-
cution capabilities. The emergence of Embodied Artificial
Intelligence (Embodied AI) has positioned robots as crucial
arXiv:2509.07500v1  [cs.RO]  9 Sep 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
2
TABLE I: Comparison of representations of some classic and recent mapping domains.
Robotic Mapping
Research Area
Optics
High-Fidelity Rending (✓)
Discrete Appearance (√∖)
Geometry
Detailed Mesh (✓)
Sparse Structure (√∖)
Semantic
Open Understanding (✓)
Closed-Set Labels (√∖)
Online
Representative Works
(Semantic) Volume Mapping
√∖
√∖
√∖
✓
OctMap [1], Voxblox [2]
Surface Reconstruction
√∖
✓
×
✓
KinectFusion [3], BundleFusion [4]
Maps For View Synthesis
✓
✓
×
×
NeRF [5], 3DGS [6]
OV Incremental Mapping
×
√∖
✓
✓
ConceptGraphs [7], HOV-SG [8]
OV NeRF/3DGS
✓
√∖
✓
×
LERF [9], LangSplat [10]
OmniMap
✓
✓
✓
✓
-
Note: This table outlines a partial yet representative selection of research areas in robotic mapping.
physical agents that bridge AI systems with the real world,
driving increasingly sophisticated representation requirements.
An ideal environmental representation should enable high-
precision, multi-dimensional understanding of the scene, while
simultaneously addressing a variety of critical aspects: (1) op-
tics: high-fidelity appearance rendering from arbitrary views,
(2) geometry: fine-grained structural reconstruction, and (3)
semantics: open-vocabulary object recognition and scene un-
derstanding. This representation should support diverse task
modes, including interactive virtual operations (scene Q&A
and editing) and multi-granular physical interactions (desktop-
level manipulation and room-level navigation).
However, current mapping frameworks remain narrowly
focused, capturing only limited aspects of the scene. Tab. I
summarizes and compares several classic and recent represen-
tations in the domain of robotic mapping. Most classic (se-
mantic) volume algorithms rely on fixed-resolution geometry
[11]–[13] and closed-set semantic [14]–[16], restricting their
functionality to basic tasks like obstacle avoidance and point-
to-point navigation. Surface reconstruction methods [3], [4] are
capable of recovering fine geometric details, but they typically
lack semantic modeling and still fall short in achieving high-
quality rendering. While recent advances in Neural Radiance
Fields (NeRF) [5] and 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [6]
have demonstrated promising capabilities for photorealistic
view synthesis, and have even been adapted into SLAM
systems [17]–[19] for online reconstruction, they still pri-
marily address only optical and geometric recovery. Open-
vocabulary (OV) mapping leverages the cognitive power of
large language models (LLMs) and vision-language models
(VLMs) to achieve rich semantic scene interpretation. Yet,
existing incremental approaches [7], [8], [20]–[22] in this
domain often rely on sparse point cloud representations, which
inherently lack the density required for high-quality rendering
and detailed scene reconstruction. The integration of OV
techniques with NeRF/3DGS appears promising for addressing
these limitations, however, their batch-style processing makes
them challenging to deploy in real-time robotic systems.
This naturally leads us to a fundamental question: Is it
feasible to develop an online mapping algorithm capable
of holistically integrating all these scene attributes while
simultaneously improving the precision of each individual
attribute? To answer this question, we present OmniMap, as
shown in Fig. 1. To better highlight its contributions, we break
down this challenge into the following key sub-questions:
1) Representation: how to integrate diverse scene at-
tributes within a unified framework? A key challenge
in 3D scene mapping lies in effectively representing and
integrating diverse scene attributes within a unified framework.
Existing methods often fall short in online robotic systems,
being constrained to a single representation [1], [3], [5]–[7]
or a na¨ıve combination thereof [23]–[25]. To address this,
OmniMap adopts a highly complementary and tightly coupled
hybrid 3DGS-Voxel representation. Voxels possess a stable and
structured spatial format and often serve as the cornerstone
for local probabilistic fusion, though their expressive capacity
is inherently constrained by resolution. Differentiable 3DGS
provides theoretically arbitrarily fine-grained representations,
but due to its positional immobility, it is difficult to directly
correlate semantics during optimization, and it faces ambiguity
in discriminating newly added Gaussians during incremental
mapping. Therefore, OmniMap organically combines the two:
voxels act as the fundamental unit for incremental mapping,
encapsulating probabilistic semantics within their structure,
while newly assigned voxels guide the initialization of Gaus-
sian primitives that underpin precise optical and geometric
reconstruction. This integration preserves the fine detail mod-
eling of 3DGS while leveraging the voxel grid’s strengths in
probabilistic fusion and structural stability.
2) Optics: how to efficiently handle camera motion
blur and exposure inconsistencies? Camera motion, whether
from a mobile chassis or a moving end-effector, frequently
induces motion blur in captured images. While some algo-
rithms address this issue through techniques like ray dis-
tortion [26], primitive shifting [27], or local linearization
[28], their high time complexity makes them unsuitable for
online dense mapping systems. Additionally, these methods
fail to handle exposure variations, a common challenge in
unevenly illuminated environments. In contrast, OmniMap
employs a lightweight differentiable camera model, which
enhances appearance reconstruction quality while maintaining
low computational overhead.
3) Geometry: how to improve geometry stability during
3DGS incremental mapping? The incremental update of
Gaussian primitives poses significant challenges for online
3DGS systems. Current approaches typically follow a brute-
force approach: they first back-project RGB-D data to generate
colored point clouds, then apply downsampling for Gaussian
initialization. This process fails to differentiate observed from
unobserved regions, causing redundant primitives in over-
scanned areas and insufficient coverage elsewhere. Omn-
iMap addresses these limitations by integrating TSDF-Fusion’s

<!-- page 3 -->
3
1. Efficient: Real-time
4. Robust: Noise-resilience
2. Accurate: SOTA
3. General: Scene-agnostic
5. Practical: Task-supported
Semantic
OmniMap
3DGS
Voxel
Fig. 2: OmniMap facilitates a holistic representation that integrates
optics, geometry, and semantics, and provides five key advantages.
incremental framework (replaceable with other voxel-based
mapping methods), strategically initializing Gaussians only
within newly assigned voxels to maintain model compactness
and geometric stability. Additionally, OmniMap incorporates
normal-based supervision directly derived from the rendered
depth, significantly enhancing the accuracy of detail modeling
and the smoothness of the mesh surface.
4) Semantics: how to robustly recognise and fuse in-
stances in open environments? While VLMs like CLIP
enable open-set object recognition within instance masks,
their textual inference capabilities remain limited. OmniMap
enhances this through an LLM-augmented front-end pipeline.
Furthermore, segmentation models often exhibit poor intra-
frame accuracy (under/over-segmentation) and inter-frame
consistency. Exciting incremental methods using IoU-based
association with 3D boxes [7] or 2D masks [29] prove sensitive
to segmentation noise. OmniMap’s novel solution employs
probabilistic instance tuples over TSDF-Fusion voxels, decom-
posing fusion into two robust subtasks: instance association
and live map evolution, modeled as MLE and MAP problems,
respectively. This probabilistic formulation naturally preserves
uncertainty for improved noise resilience.
In summary, OmniMap successfully integrates three critical
scene attributes within a general online mapping framework
while achieving significant performance improvements in all
dimensions: high-fidelity optical rendering, geometrically sta-
ble reconstruction, and open-vocabulary semantic understand-
ing. As demonstrated in Fig. 1, our framework not only
surpasses all SOTA methods in quantitative metrics, but also
enables versatile downstream applications through its holis-
tic representation. OmniMap offers five key advantages: a)
Efficient: Real-time operation at sufficient frame rate with
compact model size; b) Accurate: High precision in rendering,
mesh, and cognition; c) General: No pre-training or scene-
specific optimization required; d) Robust: Resilient to sensor
and segmentation noise; e) Practical: Supports diverse down-
stream tasks. Our contributions are summarized as follows:
• Comprehensive Representation: OmniMap establishes
the first general framework bridging optics, geometry, and
semantics in online mapping, based on a hybrid 3DGS-
Voxel representation.
• High-Fidelity Optics: We model the camera motion
blurring and exposure process based on four differen-
tiable parameters that efficiently and effectively improve
rendering quality.
• Detailed Geometry: We propose an incremental 3DGS
strategy where newly assigned voxels initialize Gaussian
primitives, and introduce higher-order normal supervision
for recovering fine-scale structures.
• Open Semantics: We design an efficient instance under-
standing pipeline and mathematically model the incre-
mental fusion process as two subtasks, enabling adapta-
tion and recovery from noise.
• SOTA Performance: OmniMap achieves superior met-
rics in image rendering, mesh reconstruction, and zero-
shot semantic segmentation, while maintaining a high
frame rate and compact model size.
II. RELATED WORKS
In this section, we review previous related research on
robotic mapping, including discrete reconstruction, 3DGS-
based dense mapping, and open-vocabulary representation.
A. Discrete Reconstruction
Classical representation structures for robotic mapping, such
as point clouds and voxels, have been extensively developed
over the past decades. The widely adopted OctoMap [1]
offers an efficient 3D probabilistic volumetric representation
via octrees. Meyer-D et al. [30] model dynamic environ-
ments by introducing state transition probabilities in Hidden
Markov Models for occupancy grids. The advancement of
deep learning has significantly accelerated progress in robotic
semantic understanding [31]–[33], enabling numerous recent
breakthroughs. SemanticFusion [34] integrates CNN-based
semantic predictions with ElasticFusion and refines them via
CRF-based map updates. Semantic-OcTree [15] proposes a
Bayesian multi-class octree mapping method, where semantic
categories are probabilistically updated. However, these meth-
ods are purely discrete and overlook the inherently continuous
nature of the real world.
To construct smoother occupancy maps, many methods
relax the assumption of voxel independence. GPmap [35] mod-
els point dependencies via nonparametric Bayesian inference.
Hilbert maps [36] leverage fast kernel approximations for
efficient training, enabling real-time incremental 3D mapping.
Recently, Bayesian kernel inference with lower computational
complexity has gained attention. BGKOctoMap [37] applies
sparse kernels and nonparametric inference to enhance effi-
ciency. To address over-inflation issues, S-MKI [38] and SEE-
CSOM [14] introduce adaptive multi-entropy kernel inference,
improving both efficiency and accuracy in continuous semantic
occupancy mapping.
Although these frameworks have served as milestones in
robotic mapping, their reliance on discrete sparse representa-
tions limits scalability. While continuous occupancy mapping
alleviates some issues, it remains constrained by map resolu-
tion, lacks rendering capabilities, and is restricted to closed-
set semantics, falling short of the representation demands in
embodied intelligence applications.
B. 3DGS-Based Dense Mapping
In recent years, learning-based implicit mapping methods
have emerged, inspired by NeRF’s strengths in continuous rep-
resentation and appearance modeling. These approaches have

<!-- page 4 -->
4
been applied to incremental SLAM [39]–[41], enabling the
generation of photorealistic renderings with compact models.
Although some efforts focus on accelerating vanilla NeRF,
the computational burden of volumetric rendering and implicit
representation continues to pose a significant challenge for the
practical deployment of NeRF-like methods. More recently,
3DGS [6] achieved real-time novel view rendering without
sacrificing quality by leveraging a tile-based differentiable
splatting technique. However, its original design is tailored
for offline processing and typically requires tens of minutes to
batch process small-scale datasets, making it unsuitable for ex-
ploratory robotics where full-scene sensor data is unavailable
upfront.
To address this, recent studies have integrated 3DGS with
visual SLAM systems and proposed targeted strategies for
online optimization. GS-SLAM [42] employs an adaptive
scaling strategy to dynamically add new or remove noisy
Gaussians, while selecting Gaussians for camera pose opti-
mization through a coarse-to-fine approach. By decomposing
the scene into independently optimized sub-maps, Gaussian-
SLAM [17] enables online optimization of newly explored
regions regardless of scene scale. SplaTAM [18] leverages
rendered depth and silhouette images to effectively capture
scene density distribution to guide Gaussian insertion. RTG-
SLAM [43] densifies Gaussians based on geometry and optics,
enforcing complete opacity or transparency to better represent
dominant and residual surface colors, respectively. MonoGS
[19] places Gaussians through depth back-projection and ap-
plies isotropic regularization to reduce artifacts in novel views.
Splat-SLAM [44] dynamically adapts to keyframe pose and
depth updates through active map deformation.
Recent approaches have focused on balancing the quality
and efficiency of dense 3DGS mapping. GS-ICP-SLAM [45]
integrates Generalized Iterative Closest Point with 3DGS
and adds mapping keyframes alongside tracking keyframes.
CaRtGS [46] an adaptive computational alignment strategy
that effectively tackles insufficient optimization, long-tail con-
vergence, and weakly constrained densification. HI-SLAM2
[47], built upon DROID-SLAM, incorporates monocular ge-
ometry priors (depth and normals) to enhance 3DGS geometric
estimation. However, these methods lack explicit 3D Gaussian
specification, making them susceptible to over- and under-
fitting. Most closely related to our work is GSFusion [23],
which combines TSDF-Fusion and 3DGS in a hybrid represen-
tation. Yet, it still relies on depth backprojection for Gaussian
initialization, using voxels only as a filtering criterion.
More importantly, existing methods often neglect two key
challenges introduced by camera motion: motion blur during
movement and exposure inconsistency across viewpoints in
non-uniformly lit scenes. While offline techniques [27] exist
for blur mitigation, their high computational cost hinders real-
time use. OmniMap addresses this by explicitly modeling per-
frame camera parameters with four differentiable variables to
capture blur and exposure configurations, and experimental
results validate the effectiveness of this design.
C. Open-Vocabulary Representation
To extend semantics from closed-set pre-trained labels
to open-set categories, researchers have developed open-
vocabulary mapping systems leveraging VLMs and LLMs for
zero-shot generalization. Early approaches typically extracted
pixel-level 2D VLM features, which are then projected or dis-
tilled into 3D space. ConceptFusion [20] combines global and
local features into pixel-aligned ones, which are subsequently
fused into a 3D point cloud via multi-view fusion, showcasing
cross-modal inference. Based on NeRF, DFF [48] distills the
knowledge of self-supervised 2D image feature extractors such
as into a 3D feature field optimized in parallel to the radiance
field. Similarly, LERF [9] learns a dense, multi-scale language
field inside NeRF by volume rendering CLIP embeddings.
OpenObj [49] and OpenMulti [50] builds multi-granularity
language fields by distilling part features into objects’ NeRFs.
Some other methods enhance the field by leveraging a
collection of 3D Gaussians. LangSplat [10] leverages SAM’s
multi-granularity masks for feature extraction and CLIP en-
coding, incorporating an autoencoder to embed compressed
semantics into Gaussians. Gaussian Grouping [51] augments
each Gaussian with a compact Identity Encoding, enabling
grouping of Gaussians based on object instances in the 3D
scene. OpenGaussian [52] trains feature consistency within
instances and employs a two-phase codebook to distinguish
between coarse and fine features. Although integration with
3DGS enables fast feature rendering in these methods, most
employ a two-stage optimization process: geometry first,
followed by semantics. To date, no approach has directly
incorporated open-vocabulary understanding into the incre-
mental mapping of 3DGS, as the continuous displacement of
Gaussian centers during optimization disrupts the stability of
their associated semantic attributes.
Recently, several algorithms have advanced incremental
instance-level or region-level open-vocabulary mapping. Con-
ceptGraphs [7] compute associations between frames accord-
ing to the IoU of the bounding box of the point cloud obtained
by back-projection of the instance segmentation mask, and
fuse features from different instances to obtain the final
instance-level point cloud. OpenGraph [21] extends Concept-
Graphs to a wide range of outdoor environments, and builds
hierarchical scene graphs for structured querying. OpenFusion
[29] extracts region-level features with SEEM and achieves
fast cross-frame correlation through 2D mask and confidence
rendering. However, these methods rely on empirically deter-
mined IoU threshold parameters and cannot fully mitigate the
impact of robust segmentation at the front end. In contrast,
OmniMap improves noise recovery by attaching probabilistic
instance tuples to each voxel, utilizing probabilistic modeling
techniques derived from a theoretical extension of OpenVox
[53]. Furthermore, OmniMap significantly extends the capabil-
ities of OpenVox by incorporating more comprehensive scene
attributes, including optical and geometric properties.
III. OVERVIEW
OmniMap presents a general framework for robotic online
mapping, enabling the simultaneous realization of optically,

<!-- page 5 -->
5
…
a wooden cabinet
round tables
a beige 
stool
a white 
pillow
a 
switch
a 
vase
2D Language Embeddings Extractor
Open-set 
Detector
Tokenize 
Anything
Text encoder
Probabilistic Voxel Reconstructor
…
Instance Mask 
Projection
2D
Pixels
↓
3D
Voxels
Instance B-Box
Mask & Caption
Embeddings
Allocated voxels
Instance Association
Live Map Evolution
Voxel-level
Mask-level
…
0.62
0.24
0.85
0.12
…
…
…
√
Voxel Updating
Codebook 
Updating
ID :
…
++
Motion-Robust 3DGS Incremental Reconstructor
Camera Modeling
Loss Function
Voxel-Based Frame Init.
Incremental 3DGS Field
Gaussian Splatting
RGB Loss
Depth Loss
Normal Loss
① 
exposure
② 
blur
raw

tran

tran
y
tran
x
…
Add New Gaussians
Keyframe Discrimination
new 
voxel
> threshold
Fig. 3: The system framework of OmniMap consists of three main modules. The 2D Language Embeddings Extractor sequentially
combines multiple open-set models for detection, segmentation, captioning, and embedding extraction of objects. The Probabilistic Voxel
Reconstructor incrementally integrates per-frame instance masks and embeddings into 3D space while maintaining voxel-aligned probabilistic
instance tuples and a global embedding codebook. The Motion-Robust 3DGS Incremental Reconstructor initializes new Gaussians from
new assigned voxels and renders 2D images under RGB, depth, and normal modalities with parameterized camera models for supervision.
geometrically, and semantically accurate representations. Om-
niMap processes RGB-D video streams in real-time, including
RGB image frames C = {C1, C2, ..., Ct}, depth image frames
D = {D1, D2, ..., Dt}, and camera poses P = {P1, P2, ..., Pt}
(where t is the timestamp index).
As shown in Fig. 1, it constructs a complete 3DGS field
Gt consisting of Gaussian primitives Gt = {gi
t} (where i
is the Gaussian index) and open-vocabulary voxel map Mt
consisting of probabilistic instance-level voxels Vt = {vj
t }
(where j is the voxel index) and an embedding codebook
Bt = {f γ
t
| γ ∈Γ} (where γ is the instance index) that
captures instance-level semantic understanding f γ
t , where Γ is
the set of all current instances. Fig. 3 illustrates the system
framework, which consists of three core modules:
i) 2D Language Embeddings Extractor: This module
extracts image embeddings for instance-level scene under-
standing in the 2D domain. OmniMap employs an efficient,
robust pipeline that enhances semantic reasoning through the
textual encoding of object captions.
ii) Probabilistic Voxel Reconstructor: This module per-
forms incremental open-set instance fusion in the 3D domain.
To address front-end segmentation noise, OmniMap employs
a voxel-based probabilistic modeling framework.
iii) Motion-Robust 3DGS Incremental Reconstructor:
This module performs incremental 3DGS scene construction.
By deriving new Gaussians and keyframes from voxels, Om-
niMap implements a lightweight and regularized Gaussian
field. Meanwhile, camera parametric modeling and normal
supervision improve the optical and geometric quality.
IV. 2D LANGUAGE EMBEDDINGS EXTRACTOR
Objects in open environments exhibit diverse types and
structural distributions, posing challenges for classical deep
learning-based semantic segmentation methods to maintain
robust generalization across varied scenes. Recent advances in
VLMs and LLMs offer new paradigms for open understanding.
Unlike pixel-aligned feature extraction approaches [9], [20],
[48], OmniMap adopts an instance-centric paradigm, treating
instances as fundamental decomposable primitives for physical
world representation, and focuses on capturing instance-level
scene information.
A. Open-set Instance Decection and Segmentation
At time t, we first apply the real-time open-vocabulary
detection model YOLO-World [54], denoted as Det(·), to
detect instances in the image Ct. Detected targets with con-
fidence scores exceeding a predefined threshold are localized
via bounding boxes. Although YOLO-World provides coarse
category predictions, it lacks fine-grained attributes (e.g., color,
shape) and precise segmentation masks.
To address this, we seamlessly integrate the TAP model
[55], denoted as SegCap(·), as a backend to YOLO-World.

<!-- page 6 -->
6
Prompted by YOLO-World’s bounding boxes, TAP concur-
rently produces pixel-level segmentation masks and corre-
sponding descriptive captions. The output masks are denoted
as

mk
t
	
(where k is the mask index) and the captions as

ck
t
	
, encapsulating essential visual characteristics. To handle
overlapping masks in the raw outputs, we apply a post-
processing step that prioritizes smaller masks over larger ones
and performs edge erosion. This process can be expressed as:
{mk
t , ck
t } = SegCap (Det(Ct))
(1)
B. LLM-Enhanced Embedding Encoding
The textual captions

ck
t
	
, while human-interpretable,
present challenges for robotic systems. Trained on large-scale
corpora, LLMs demonstrate human-like reasoning capabilities.
Inspired by this, OmniMap leverages LLMs Enc(·) to encode
captions for enhanced semantic representations. Specifically,
we utilize the SBERT model [56], which satisfies the crit-
ical requirement of mapping variable-length texts to fixed-
dimensional embeddings. The resulting caption embeddings
are denoted as

f k
t
	
:
{f k
t } = Enc
 ck
t

(2)
After processing with above complete pipeline, we derive
for the 2D image-size masks

mk
t
	
and caption embeddings
{f k
t } from current RGB image Ct, which will be grounded
into 3D space in the next module.
V. PROBABILISTIC VOXEL RECONSTRUCTOR
After segmenting and comprehending the current frame
Ct, we perform incremental instance-level reconstruction to
incorporate the results

mk
t , f k
t
	
into the voxel map Mt−1.
Throughout this process, we adopt a probabilistic modeling
framework to enhance the robustness of mapping, as shown in
Fig. 4. The map is represented by probabilistic voxels V, with
each voxel vj storing a probabilistic instance ID tuple θj. In
practice, we apply the TSDF-Fusion algorithm [57] integrated
with the Open3D framework. To optimize memory usage, the
voxel map is composed of active hashing blocks, distributed
only in the vicinity of obstacles, with each block containing
83 voxels. Open-vocabulary understanding is maintained via
a separate embedding codebook B that links each instance ID
γ to its fused caption embedding f γ.
A. Problem Definition and Decomposition
The incremental instance-level voxel mapping problem is
defined as follows:
Given the current frame’s sensor observations and 2D in-
stance cognition results Qt = {{mk
t , f k
t }, Dt, Pt}, determine
It the updated map Mt = {Vt, Bt} from the map at the last
moment Mt−1:
P(It, Mt | Mt−1, Qt)
(3)
where It = {Ik
t } represents the instance IDs assigned to all
masks {mk
t }, indicating their correspondence to the existing
map instances Γt−1.
RGB
Detected
Mask
Rendered
Mask
Fig. 4: The comparison between rendered and detected masks
highlights its effectiveness in associating instances across frames
(yellow lines) and mitigating missing, under-, or over-segmentation
(red boxes).
Applying the chain rule, we derive the problem as:
P(It, Mt | Mt−1, Qt)
= P(It | Mt−1, Qt)
|
{z
}
instance association
· P(Mt | Mt−1, Qt, It)
|
{z
}
live map evolution
(4)
This involves two subtasks: the instance association task
P(It | Mt−1, Qt) and the live map evolution task P(Mt |
Mt−1, Qt, It).
B. Instance Association
Unlike traditional closed-set semantic frameworks, where
semantics are inherently associated across frames, instance
segmentation in open environments lacks mask inherent as-
sociations among frames, and the number of instances is
unlimited. Furthermore, as shown in Fig. 4, instance segmenta-
tion quality fluctuates due to challenging conditions including
uneven lighting, oblique viewpoints, and object clutter. Thus,
robustly associating new-frame masks {mk
t } with existing
instances Γt−1 or initializing new ones becomes crucial.
Instance association involves mapping each segmented mask
mk
t to the instance ID set Γt−1 from the current map Mt−1:
P(It | Mt−1, Qt) = P(It | Vt−1, Bt−1, {mk
t , f k
t }, Dt, Pt)
(5)
Given that mask overlaps are resolved in Subsection IV-A,
each mask’s instance association can be treated independently.
Under the conditional independence assumption, this reduces
to solving separate association tasks for individual masks mk
t :
Y
i
P(Ik
t | Vt−1, Bt−1, mk
t , f k
t , Dt, Pt)
(6)
where Ik
t is the map instance ID associated with mask mk
t .
We first project the mask mk
t into the voxel map V according
to the depth image Dt to get the corresponding associated
voxel region Vmk
t :
Vmk
t = Vox
 
Dt[u,v]PtK−1 · [u, v] | [u, v] ∈mk
t
	
(7)

<!-- page 7 -->
7
Algorithm 1: Instance Association Algorithm
Input: Segmented masks {mk
t , f k
t };
Depth image Dt, camera pose Pt;
Current voxel map Vt−1 and codebook Bt−1
Output: Instance IDs {Ik
t } for each mask {mk
t }
1 foreach mask mk
t do
2
Project pixels [u, v] ∈mk
t to 3D using Dt and Pt
3
Obtain corresponding voxel region Vmk
t via Eq. (7)
4
if Vmk
t has no prior instance then
5
Assign new instance ID γnew, add to Γt−1
6
Initialize Bt−1[γnew] ←f k
t
7
else
8
foreach existing instance γ ∈Γt−1 do
9
Compute geometric similarity Sgeo
Ik
t =γ via
Eq. (9)
10
Compute embedding similarity Semb
Ik
t =γ via
Eq. (10)
11
Fuse to get final score AIk
t =γ
12
if maxγ AIk
t =γ > ξ then
13
Assign Ik
t = arg maxγ AIk
t =γ
14
else
15
Assign new instance ID γnew, add to Γt−1
16
Initialize Bt−1[γnew] ←f k
t
17 Update instance set: Γt ←Γt−1;
18 return {Ik
t }
where [u, v] are the pixel coordinates within the mask mk
t , K
is the camera internal parameter matrix, and Vox(·) is the 3D
point-to-voxel transformation.
Consequently, our approach centers on computing the opti-
mal instance assignment for the voxel set Vmk
t . In cases where
Vmk
t lacks prior instance information (indicating an initial
observation), we perform two simultaneous operations: ex-
panding the instance set Γt−1 by creating a new instance γnew,
and initializing its associated embedding in the codebook Bt−1
using the extracted mask feature f k
t . This approach efficiently
handles previously unobserved instances while maintaining the
integrity of the incremental mapping framework.
When Vmk
t contains existing instance information, the prob-
ability that the mask mk
t is associated with these instances
must be determined. Using a Bayesian formulation, we con-
vert this task into a Maximum Likelihood Estimation (MLE)
problem:
P(Ik
t | Vmk
t ) ∝P(Ik
t )P(Vmk
t | Ik
t )
(8)
where P(Ik
t ) denotes the prior probability, assumed to be
uniform across all instances Γt−1. Therefore, the goal is to
solve for Ik
t such that the likelihood of all voxels vj
mk
t ∈Vmk
t
having the current instance θj
mk
t is maximized.
Since the voxels are relatively independent, a rigorous ap-
proach would involve multiplying the likelihood probabilities
of each voxel. However, this introduces high computational
complexity and is prone to arithmetic underflow. To mitigate
this, we simplify the MLE process by accumulating evidence.
By applying the law of large numbers, if the number of voxels
Vmk
t is sufficiently large and the observed probability distri-
bution for each voxel is accurate, averaging these likelihood
probabilities provides a reliable estimate of the geometric
similarity Sgeo
Ik
t =γ for mask mk
t and instance γ:
Sgeo
Ik
t =γ = E
j ({θj
mk
t [γ]})
(9)
The geometric similarity metric Sgeo
Ik
t =γ operates on the
principle that spatially co-located masks are more likely to
correspond to the same object. However, this assumption
may break down for adjacent objects with tight spatial cou-
plings, such as books on a table, especially in voxelized
configurations. To address this limitation, we augment the
geometric measure with embedding cosine similarity Semb
Ik
t =γ,
enabling robust instance association through semantic-level
feature matching:
Semb
Ik
t =γ = Cos Sim(f γ
t−1, f k
t )
(10)
where f γ
t−1 is the embedding for instance γ in codebook Bt−1.
The final association probability AIk
t =γ is obtained by
the weighted fusion of the two similarities Sgeo
Ik
t =γ
and
Semb
Ik
t =γ. Instance association occurs if the maximum proba-
bility Max
γ (AIk
t =γ) exceeds the instance fusion threshold ξ;
otherwise, a new instance is initialized to Γt−1. The complete
instance association algorithm is detailed in Alg. 1.
C. Live Map Evolution
The live map evolution jointly updates both the voxel
representation Vt−1 and the embedding codebook Bt−1. The
voxel update process employs probabilistic local fusion to
maintain robustness against segmentation noise, while the
codebook progressively integrates multi-view instance percep-
tions through feature aggregation.
Voxel Updating: For voxel updating, we propose the In-
stance Counting Sensor Model (ICSM), inspired by the seman-
tic counting sensor model in [58]. As previously mentioned,
each voxel vj in V stores a probabilistic instance ID tuple
θj = {θj,γ | γ ∈Γ}, where θj,γ > 0 and P
γ∈Γ θj,γ = 1.
During the instance association phase, we process observation
data {Vmk
t , Ik
t }, simplified as {(vj
t , yj
t )}, where vj
t denotes
the observed voxels in the current frame, and yj
t is a one-hot-
encoded measurement tuple representing the observed instance
ID.
Voxel updating is essentially a Maximum A Posteriori
estimation (MAP) task:
p(θj
t | yj
t ) ∝p(yj
t | θj
t)p(θj
t)
(11)
where the prior probability p(θj
t) is modeled as equivalent
to the previous timestep’s posterior probability p(θj
t−1). The
likelihood p(yj
t | θj
t) follows a Categorical distribution, rep-
resenting the probability distribution over possible labels yj,γ
t
for voxel vj given the current observation:
p(yj
t | θj
t) =
Y
γ∈Γ
(θj,γ
t
)
yj,γ
t
(12)

<!-- page 8 -->
8
Algorithm 2: Live Map Evolution
Input: Observation set {(vj
t , yj
t )};
Mask set {(mk
t , Ik
t , f k
t )};
Previous voxel map Vt−1, Codebook Bt−1
Output: Updated voxel map Vt, Codebook Bt
1 foreach voxel observation (vj
t , yj
t ) do
2
αj
t ←αj
t−1 + yj
t
3
θj
t,γ ←αj
t,γ/ P
γ′ αj
t,γ′
4 foreach mask mk
t with instance ID Ik
t and feature f k
t
do
5
Compute credibiliy wk
t via Eq. (17) and Eq. (18)
6
W Ik
t
t
←W Ik
t
t−1 + wk
t
7
f Ik
t
t
←

W Ik
t
t−1f Ik
t
t−1 + wk
t f k
t

/W Ik
t
t
8 Update voxel map: Vt ←Vt−1
9 Update codebook: Bt ←Bt−1
10 return Vt, Bt
When applying the Dirichlet distribution, the conjugate prior
for the Categorical distribution, to the prior probability, the
posterior probability remains of the same distribution type:
p(θj
t−1) ∝
Y
γ∈Γ
(θj,γ
t
)
αj,γ
t−1−1
(13)
p(θj
t | yj
t ) ∝
Y
γ∈Γ
(θj,γ
t
)
αj,γ
t
−1
(14)
where αj
t−1 and αj
t are the concentration parameters of the
prior and posterior, respectively.
Substituting Eq. (12), Eq. (13) and Eq. (14) into (11), we
can deduce that:
αj,γ
t
= αj,γ
t−1 + yj,γ
t
(15)
Since αj,γ
t
counts the number of times voxel vj is associated
with instance label γ, we refer to this model as the instance
counting sensor model. Given αj
t, the probabilistic instance
tuple of the voxel vj is the closed-form expected value of the
posterior Dirichlet [14]:
θj,γ
t
=
αj,γ
t
P
γ′∈Γ
αj,γ′
t
(16)
The Dirichlet concentration parameters αj
t act as pseudo-
counts that accumulate evidence over time. This formulation
provides three key properties: (i) the update rule Eq. (15)
becomes a simple counting operation, (ii) the expected value
Eq. (16) yields interpretable probabilities, and (iii) the variance
naturally decreases with accumulating evidence.
Codebook Updating: For the codebook updating, we use
a weighted fusion strategy. For each mask mk
t , the associated
instance ID Ik
t is obtained in the instance association step.
The credibility wt
i of its current frame observation features
f k
t is evaluated by combining the association probability AIk
t
and the visibility ratio Rk
t :
wt
k = AIk
t · Rk
t
(17)
Rk
t =
Vmk
t



arg max
γ

θj
t−1[γ]

= Ik
t

j

(18)
The visibility ratio Rk represents the proportion of the in-
stance’s size observed by the current mask mk
t relative to the
total size of the instance. This helps prevent mask features
with poor viewing (e.g., only a corner of a couch is visible)
from contaminating the global codebook. Based on this, the
updating of the codebook can be derived as:
f Ik
t
t
=

W Ik
t
t−1f Ik
t
t−1 + wi
tf k
t

/W Ik
t
t
(19)
W Ik
t
t
= W Ik
t
t−1 + wk
t
(20)
where f Ik
t
t
and W Ik
t
t
are the updated features and weights
of instance Ik
t in embedding codebook Bt, respectively. The
complete instance association algorithm is detailed in Alg. 2.
VI. MOTION-ROBUST 3DGS INCREMENTAL
RECONSTRUCTOR
The preceding sections have robustly achieved incremen-
tal scene understanding through voxel-based representations.
While voxels enable locally fused updates, their inherent
resolution limitations fundamentally restrict the ability to
reconstruct high-fidelity geometric and photometric details of
the scene. To address these limitations, we now introduce
an incremental representation based on 3DGS [6], which
reconstructs scene observations using more flexible and dif-
ferentiable Gaussian primitives. This approach overcomes the
rigid structural constraints of voxel grids while maintaining
the incremental update capabilities essential for scene recon-
struction.
A. Preliminary for 3DGS
3DGS [6] is composed of 3D explicit Gaussian ellipsoids
{gi} parameterized by
1) 3D center:
µi = (xi, yi, zi) ∈R3
2) 3D rotation:
qi = (qwi, qxi, qyi, qzi) ∈R4
3) RGB color:
ci = (ri, gi, bi) ∈R3
4) 3D size (scaling factor):
si = (sxi, syi, szi) ∈R3
5) Opacity logit:
oi ∈[0, 1]
Each Gaussian occupies a spatial region, and RGB values ci
can alternatively be represented as view-dependent spherical
harmonics coefficients. For an arbitrary query point x ∈R3,
the i-th Gaussian gi’s contribution is weighted by its opacity
oi, computed via the standard Gaussian function:
ηi(x) = oi exp

−1
2(x −µi)ΣiT (x −µi)

(21)
where Σi ∈R3×3 is the covariance matrix calculated by
combining the scaling component Si = darg([sxi
syi
szi]
and the rotation component Ri = q2R([qwi
qxi
qyi
qzi].
Due to their formulation, Gaussians have theoretically infi-
nite support, which leads to gradients having a global influence
during optimization. To fit observed scenes, 3DGS differen-
tiably renders Gaussians {gi} into images. During rendering,

<!-- page 9 -->
9
t=0
t=1
RGB
Image
Added
Gaussians
Fig. 5: OmniMap initializes the Gaussian by distinguishing the
newly added voxels, providing an efficient yet effective coverage of
newly observed regions. After initialization, only minimal Gaussian
additions are required for subsequent updates.
Gaussian primitives are depth-sorted and projected via a 2D
version of Eq. (21). The 2D density of gi is denoted as αi. The
color ˆC(p) and depth ˆD(p) of each pixel p are then computed
using alpha-blending:
ˆC(p) =
X
i
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)
(22)
ˆD(p) =
X
i
hiαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)
(23)
where hi represent the depth of the Gaussian primitive gi in
given camera pose.
B. Voxel-Based Frame Initialization
Add New Gaussians: Unlike the original 3DGS paradigm,
online incremental 3DGS requires the continuous addition of
new Gaussians to adapt to newly observed regions, which
are unpredictable a priori. Some existing methods [47] adopt
a brute-force incremental approach, back-projecting each
keyframe to initialize Gaussian centers from point clouds.
However, this leads to uneven scene distribution, where
frequently observed regions accumulate excessive Gaussian
density compared to rarely viewed areas. To mitigate this,
alternative methods [17] use rendered alpha-blending values
to identify newly observed pixels for back-projection. Yet,
this approach remains vulnerable to artifacts from large-scale
Gaussians in novel views and lacks 3D physical consistency.
Thanks to TSDF-Fusion’s standardized voxel representation,
OmniMap achieves regular and efficient Gaussian initializa-
tion. Specifically, OmniMap identifies candidate voxels for
Gaussian addition through a simple filter operation on the
counting values from Eq. (15):
Vnew
t
=
n
vj|αj
t−1 = 0 and αj
t > 0
o
(24)
Vnew
t
is the new voxel centers, from where new Gaussians
Gnew
t
are initialized. The colors of Gnew
t
are set as the voxel
colors from TSDF-Fusion. Their spatial extent s is scaled to
0.2 times the voxel size, with an initial opacity o of 0.5. Fig.
5 demonstrates OmniMap’s Gaussian addition process in a
representative case.
exposure time
exposure time
0.897      0.268
1.408     -8.820
0.520      0.520
1.216     -0.528
0.363       0.363
0.768      -1.392
0.488      0.488
0.256      1.056
0.389      0.366
1.152     -0.528
0.523      0.519
1.216      -0.912
 0.504       0.501
-0.128       0.000
0.511       0.499
0.960      7.152
Fig.
6:
Schematic
of
camera
modeling.
The
numbers
under
images
correspond
to
the
optimized
parameter
set
[ωraw, ωtrans, xtrans, ytrans].
Quantitative
analysis
reveals:
(1) high-brightness images show elevated ωraw + ωtrans (blue bar)
relative to low-brightness conditions, and (2) blurred images exhibit
consistently higher |xtrans|+|ytrans| (green bar) compared to sharp
counterparts. These correlations validate OmniMap’s effectiveness
in camera modeling.
Keyframe Discrimination: Similar to other 3DGS-based
SLAM systems, OmniMap maintains a keyframe buffer to pre-
vent catastrophic forgetting during incremental optimization.
To ensure effective scene coverage, keyframe selection prior-
itizes maximally divergent viewpoints, thereby enhancing the
quality of multi-view reconstruction. Our approach quantifies
view dissimilarity by computing the ratio of unregistered to
observed regions at the voxel level. To do this, we introduce
a boolean variable r(vj
t ) for each voxel vj, initialized as un-
registered and updated to registered upon keyframe inclusion.
When the unregistered region ratio τt exceeds a predefined
threshold, the current frame is added to the keyframe buffer:
τt = 1
n
n
X
j=1
I(r(vj
t ))
(25)
where n denotes the total number of observable voxels at time
t with pose Pt, and I is the indicator function. In OmniMap,
keyframes are selected not only based on the unregistered
ratio but also when more than Nkey consecutive frames are
observed without inserting a new keyframe. Such temporal
density control avoids under-sampling of the scene, which is
critical for dense reconstruction accuracy.
C. Camera Modeling
In image-based multi-view dense mapping, the camera
model plays a critical role in determining reconstruction qual-
ity. The fundamental camera parameters consist of intrinsic
and extrinsic parameters. During incremental 3DGS mapping,
intrinsic parameters K remain fixed (as they are camera-
specific), while extrinsic parameters are derived from the

<!-- page 10 -->
10
camera pose P, typically estimated by visual SLAM systems.
However, two pervasive challenges extend beyond these basic
parameters: motion blur and exposure inconsistency. Motion
blur arises from relative camera-scene motion during exposure,
resulting in smeared trajectories in captured images. Exposure
inconsistency occurs when varying lighting conditions or
view-dependent reflectivity cause divergent brightness levels
across different viewpoints, more precisely, commonly per-
ceived as variations in light intensity.
The physical process of camera motion blur can be math-
ematically modeled as a temporal integration of latent sharp
images along the camera’s trajectory during exposure:
Ct = ϕ
Z t
t−τ
˜Cdt
(26)
where Ct denotes the real captured motion-blurred image at
time t, ϕ serves as a normalization factor, ˜C is the virtual
latent sharp image captured at timestamp [t −τ, t] within the
exposure time.
To simplify the solution, OmniMap discretely approximates
the model in Eq. (26) as a weighted average of the exposure
start and end moments:
Ct ≈ωtrans ¯Ct−τ + ωraw ¯Ct
(27)
where ωtrans and ωraw are two control parameters in the range
[0, 1]. With this setting, the camera model in Eq. (27) can
effectively simulate exposure intensity: when ωtrans+ωraw >
1, the image appears brighter; and when ωtrans + ωraw < 1,
the image appears darker.
¯Ct−τ represents a simulated sharp image at a discrete
timestep within the current frame’s exposure period. For small
time intervals, minor camera translation can be approximated
as a global image shift, neglecting depth variations and rota-
tional effects. We model ¯Ct−τ using the image transformation
parameters xtrans and ytrans:
¯Ct−τ ≈Txtrans,ytrans
 ¯Ct

(28)
where Txtrans,ytrans(·) denotes a translation transformation
[xtrans,ytrans] for the image. Thus the rendered image is
modeled as four parameters:
Ct ≈ωtransTxtrans,ytrans
 ¯Ct

+ ωraw ¯Ct
(29)
Similar to the Gaussian primitives, these four parameters
[ωraw, ωtrans, xtrans, ytrans] are jointly optimized within the
3DGS pipeline, which are initialized to [0.5, 0.5, 0, 0]. The
incorporation of camera modeling significantly enhances scene
reconstruction quality while mitigating the impact of motion
blur and exposure variations on Gaussian field optimization.
As shown in Fig. 6, our camera modeling approach is pre-
sented alongside experimental results that verify the effective-
ness of the proposed blur and exposure modeling strategy.
D. Loss Function
To ensure Gaussian primitives faithfully reconstruct the real-
world scene and the camera model accurately represent the
imaging process, OmniMap employs multiple loss functions
to optimize these parameters.
RGB
GT Normal
Render Normal
Normal w/o Loss
Fig. 7: OmniMap’s rendering produces smooth and geometrically
consistent normal images despite being trained with noisy supervi-
sion, demonstrating significantly better reconstruction quality than
approaches without Lnormal.
RGB Loss: For keyframe with time t′, we employ Eq.
(22) to render the raw color image ˆCt′. To ensure sharp
reconstruction, we transform the rendered image ˆCt′ using
Eq. (29) with the corresponding camera model parameters for
current keyframe, producing ˆC
cam
t′
, which is then supervised
against the real observed image Ct′. This supervision is
implemented through a combination of L1 loss Lrgb and SSIM
loss Lssim:
Lrgb =
ˆC
cam
t′
−Ct′

1
(30)
Lssim = SSIM(ˆC
cam
t′
, Ct′)
(31)
Depth Loss: Relying solely on RGB supervision may lead
to overfitting, significantly degrading novel view synthesis
quality. To address this, we incorporate depth supervision to
guide Gaussian primitives in accurately conforming to object
surfaces, thereby improving geometric fidelity. The depth
supervision is implemented using an L1 loss Ldepth between
the rendered depth ˆDt′ and ground truth depth Dt′:
Ldepth =
ˆDt′ −Dt′

1
(32)
Normal Loss: Compared to depth, normals exhibit stronger
local geometric sensitivity and multi-view consistency. Depart-
ing from monocular estimation approaches [47], we directly
compute normal images from depth images. To enforce geo-
metric accuracy, we employ a cosine similarity loss Lnormal
between the rendered normal image ˆNt′ (derived from ˆDt′ )
and the ground truth normal image Nt′ (derived from Dt′:
Lnormal = 1 −
D
ˆNt′, Nt′
E
(33)
where ⟨·⟩denotes the inner product operation. As illustrated in
Fig. 7, the optimized rendered normal image ˆNt′ demonstrates
superior geometric fidelity after optimization, despite noise-
induced artifacts in the ground truth normal image Nt′ derived
from depth measurements. This improvement is particularly
evident when compared to reconstruction results without nor-
mal supervision, where fine geometric details are significantly
harder to recover.
By
integrating
the
aforementioned
losses
through
a
weighted combination, OmniMap progressively optimizes both

<!-- page 11 -->
11
TABLE II: Rendering quality evaluations on Replica dataset.
Method
Metric
ro-0
ro-1
ro-2
of-0
of-1
of-2
of-3
of-4
Avg.
PSNR↑
26.14
30.64 31.56 37.32 37.43 30.65 30.54 33.37 32.21
SSIM ↑
0.905
0.947 0.956 0.985 0.986 0.968 0.970 0.974 0.961
RTG-
SLAM
LPIPS ↓
0.281
0.194 0.188 0.094 0.112 0.180 0.167 0.161 0.172
PSNR↑
32.34
33.08 35.08 41.16 42.73 34.28 35.76 36.55 36.37
SSIM ↑
0.913
0.921 0.953 0.980 0.982 0.951 0.963 0.967 0.954
Gaussian-
SLAM
LPIPS ↓
0.100
0.107 0.063 0.025 0.026 0.079 0.048 0.056 0.063
PSNR↑
33.20
34.80 36.41 39.52 40.73 35.91 36.04 33.23 36.23
SSIM ↑
0.939
0.942 0.964 0.969 0.976 0.966 0.968 0.938 0.958
MonoGS
LPIPS ↓
0.073
0.060 0.041 0.034 0.031 0.035 0.028 0.077 0.047
PSNR↑
33.42
33.86 35.32 39.57 40.56 32.15 30.88 32.71 34.81
SSIM ↑
0.982
0.974 0.988 0.989 0.987 0.971 0.961 0.958 0.976
SplaTAM
LPIPS ↓
0.059
0.067 0.045 0.040 0.052 0.074 0.086 0.105 0.066
PSNR↑
29.797 31.81 34.83 38.04 38.05 31.33 32.58 36.28 34.70
SSIM ↑
0.929
0.948 0.965 0.970 0.957 0.953 0.960 0.972 0.961
GSFusion
LPIPS ↓
0.063
0.076 0.055 0.043 0.079 0.086 0.042 0.044 0.061
PSNR↑
35.24
36.24 36.94 41.06 41.15 34.72 34.94 39.52 37.47
SSIM ↑
0.962
0.961 0.971 0.985 0.982 0.969 0.972 0.979 0.973
GS-ICP-
SLAM
LPIPS ↓
0.035
0.049 0.041 0.020 0.028 0.055 0.042 0.028 0.037
PSNR↑
31.92
31.84 37.59 36.00 37.28 33.43 34.27 36.75 34.88
SSIM ↑
0.922
0.924 0.970 0.954 0.956 0.943 0.946 0.961 0.947
CaRtGS
LPIPS ↓
0.058
0.077 0.029 0.060 0.038 0.070 0.059 0.043 0.054
PSNR↑
33.37
34.96 36.17 40.14 41.11 35.23 34.93 36.76 36.59
SSIM ↑
0.945
0.957 0.966 0.979 0.981 0.962 0.962 0.965 0.965
HI-
SLAM2
LPIPS ↓
0.054
0.052 0.043 0.030 0.025 0.053 0.046 0.053 0.044
PSNR↑
37.93
38.27 38.68 42.01 42.06 38.23 38.29 40.38 39.48
SSIM ↑
0.979
0.978 0.979 0.989 0.983 0.980 0.981 0.985 0.982
Ours
LPIPS ↓
0.020
0.027 0.028 0.013 0.024 0.021 0.018 0.016 0.021
the Gaussian primitives and camera parameters. This op-
timization framework enables incremental reconstruction of
scene appearance and geometry, facilitated by the dynamically
expanding keyframe collection.
VII. BENCHMARK RESULTS
A. Experimental Setup
Implementation Details: Our implementation primarily
utilizes the PyTorch framework and is tested on a single
RTX 4090 GPU. In all experiments, we set the resolution
of the voxels to 0.03m to balance precision and memory.
For the initial frame, we execute 1000 warm-up iterations.
For subsequent frames, we process each input frame once,
along with 19 randomly selected keyframes from the buffer.
No Gaussian densification or pruning is performed beyond the
voxel-based frame initialization.
Baseline: We benchmark OmniMap against SOTA methods
in both 3DGS incremental mapping and open-vocabulary
understanding. For rendering and reconstruction evaluations,
we compare it with 8 3DGS incremental mapping meth-
ods (RTG-SLAM [43], Gaussian-SLAM [17], MonoGS [19],
SplaTAM [18], GSFusion [23], GS-ICP-SLAM [45], CaRtGS
[46], and HI-SLAM2 [47]) providing all methods with ground-
truth poses P for fair comparison. For open-vocabulary
semantic segmentation, we evaluate it against 3 3DGS-
based approaches (OpenGaussian [52], LangSplat [10], and
GraspSplats [59]) and 4 incremental methods (ConceptFusion
[20], ConceptGraph [7], OpenFusion [29], and HOV-SG [8]).
For fair comparison, we reproduced all baseline methods using
their official implementations in our local environment.
TABLE III: Rendering quality evaluations on ScanNet dataset.
Method
Metric
0000
0059
0106
0169
0181
0207
Avg.
PSNR↑
19.07
17.45
15.83
18.88
18.17
19.27
18.11
SSIM ↑
0.820
0.747
0.712
0.792
0.776
0.790
0.773
RTG-
SLAM
LPIPS ↓
0.469
0.500
0.548
0.471
0.551
0.488
0.504
PSNR↑
23.74
21.51
22.09
25.03
22.95
24.75
23.35
SSIM ↑
0.754
0.739
0.785
0.789
0.811
0.785
0.777
Gaussian-
SLAM
LPIPS ↓
0.475
0.430
0.418
0.401
0.519
0.450
0.449
PSNR↑
19.60
18.13
17.73
20.42
17.93
19.48
18.88
SSIM ↑
0.696
0.663
0.687
0.726
0.743
0.710
00.70
MonoGS
LPIPS ↓
0.499
0.454
0.527
0.455
0.519
0.477
00.49
PSNR↑
19.19
19.09
17.99
22.21
16.72
19.31
19.09
SSIM ↑
0.655
0.773
0.700
0.789
0.670
0.685
0.712
SplaTAM
LPIPS ↓
0.427
0.290
0.350
0.285
0.416
0.349
0.353
PSNR↑
18.98
18.86
19.22
19.29
17.79
20.04
19.03
SSIM ↑
0.733
0.764
0.811
0.708
0.745
0.769
0.755
GSFusion
LPIPS ↓
0.419
0.355
0.353
0.389
0.491
0.437
0.407
PSNR↑
21.16
19.53
18.19
20.57
21.02
21.57
20.34
SSIM ↑
0.762
0.759
0.782
0.784
0.830
0.772
0.782
GS-ICP-
SLAM
LPIPS ↓
0.438
0.429
0.440
0.402
0.493
0.477
0.447
PSNR↑
19.57
20.00
19.24
20.31
17.53
18.04
19.12
SSIM ↑
0.759
0.812
0.822
0.796
0.792
0.692
0.779
CaRtGS
LPIPS ↓
0.397
0.353
0.364
0.362
0.590
0.535
0.433
PSNR↑
24.10
21.33
22.40
26.53
22.23
23.65
23.37
SSIM ↑
0.785
0.793
0.825
0.805
0.829
0.774
0.802
HI-
SLAM2
LPIPS ↓
0.368
0.341
0.331
0.372
0.424
0.429
0.378
PSNR↑
26.61
24.30
25.05
27.05
26.33
26.90
26.04
SSIM ↑
0.813
0.831
0.860
0.836
0.873
0.812
0.838
Ours
LPIPS ↓
0.326
0.284
0.284
0.278
0.322
0.353
0.308
Dataset and Metrics: We select eight scenes from the
synthetic Replica [60] dataset and six scenes from the real-
world ScanNet [61] dataset to represent a diverse set of
environments. For rendering quality evaluation, we employ
standard metrics: PSNR, SSIM, and LPIPS. Geometric re-
construction is assessed using Accuracy (Acc.), complete-
ness (Comp.), completion rate (Comp. Rat.), and F-score. For
open-vocabulary semantic understanding, we measured: mean
IoU (mIoU), frequency-weighted IoU (fIoU), mean accuracy
(mAcc), frequency-weighted accuracy (fAcc).
B. Optics: Image Rendering
To evaluate the optical reconstruction capability of Om-
niMap, we rendered novel views using camera trajectories
P from the reconstructed 3DGS field G representation and
quantitatively compared them with GT RGB images C. We
present quantitative rendering results for the Replica and Scan-
Net datasets in Tab. II and Tab. III, respectively. OmniMap
achieves the best performance across almost all synthetic
and real scenes, owing to several key design features: voxel-
based Gaussian initialization, which ensures ample optimiza-
tion potential in any region; a small number of iterations
over multiple keyframes, enabling collaborative supervision
from various viewpoints; and modeling of camera parameters
to address motion blur and exposure inconsistencies across
frames. The performance gain is particularly significant on
ScanNet’s challenging real-world scenes with frequent blurring
and exposure issues. While alternative methods show compet-
itive performance in specific scenarios, OmniMap consistently
outperforms across metrics.

<!-- page 12 -->
12
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
GT
Ours
HI-SLAM2
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
GT
Ours
HI-SLAM2
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
GT
Ours
HI-SLAM2
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
GT
Ours
HI-SLAM2
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
room_2
office_2
scene0059_00
scene0106_00
Fig. 8: The rendering comparisons across diverse scenes demonstrate OmniMap’s superior visual quality, achieving both higher overall
fidelity and more accurate texture details than all baseline methods.
Qualitative results for representative scenes are shown in
Fig. 8. In the noise-free Replica dataset (top four rows), all
methods are nearly indistinguishable from the true images.
However, when zooming in on details such as the stripes
on the floor stand and the mesh chair backrest, OmniMap
exhibits higher fidelity in color, indicating superior detailing
capabilities in optical reconstruction. The accurate reproduc-
tion of fine textures further emphasizes OmniMap’s ability to
capture subtle features, which may be missed by competing
methods. The ScanNet comparisons (bottom rows) provide
more compelling evidence, with OmniMap accurately recon-
structing challenging elements (long sticks, wall meshes) that
other methods either distort or fail to capture completely.
Notably, OmniMap excels at reconstructing long, thin objects
and intricate details that often suffer from noise or occlusion
in real-world datasets. This highlights the method’s robust-
ness and flexibility in handling diverse scene geometries and
textures. OmniMap even demonstrates superior reconstruction
quality compared to GT in certain scenarios, as evidenced by
scene0059 00 where our method recovers clearer rope textures

<!-- page 13 -->
13
TABLE IV: Reconstruction quality evaluations on ScanNet dataset.
Method
Metric
0000
0059
0106
0169
0181
0207
Avg.
Acc. ↓
03.98
13.67
22.84
05.23
08.83
08.51
10.51
Comp. ↓
02.54
04.00
04.57
02.86
05.69
02.70
03.73
Comp. Rat. ↑
94.26
82.70
76.22
90.19
61.94
90.06
82.56
RTG-
SLAM
F-Score ↑
85.86
61.72
54.18
78.40
48.82
78.59
67.93
Acc. ↓
04.21
13.54
25.98
07.86
05.12
09.90
11.10
Comp. ↓
03.93
05.35
04.34
04.94
04.52
03.86
04.49
Comp. Rat. ↑
75.70
57.83
68.07
52.57
61.62
79.72
65.92
Gaussian-
SLAM
F-Score ↑
75.46
51.07
50.31
50.14
61.58
72.87
60.24
Acc. ↓
04.78
11.02
25.33
06.91
05.82
08.97
10.47
Comp. ↓
03.91
03.66
04.45
03.05
04.20
02.76
03.67
Comp. Rat. ↑
86.37
84.45
76.76
86.99
75.19
89.38
83.19
MonoGS
F-Score ↑
82.50
70.09
53.53
77.80
71.66
77.62
72.20
Acc. ↓
03.02
12.73
26.11
09.67
03.96
09.61
10.85
Comp. ↓
02.55
03.15
03.74
03.33
03.04
02.62
03.07
Comp. Rat. ↑
91.04
84.95
79.68
84.41
86.62
91.21
86.32
SplaTAM
F-Score ↑
89.77
71.28
58.29
73.17
84.66
81.37
76.42
Acc. ↓
07.45
12.35
26.97
12.24
10.50
11.46
13.50
Comp. ↓
04.80
04.24
07.89
07.40
07.67
05.82
06.30
Comp. Rat. ↑
68.39
72.91
47.62
43.11
44.32
60.94
56.22
GSFusion
F-Score ↑
62.16
57.07
33.65
36.32
39.67
52.82
46.95
Acc. ↓
04.80
10.96
25.10
06.93
05.83
09.00
10.44
Comp. ↓
03.91
03.72
04.42
03.05
04.21
02.78
03.68
Comp. Rat. ↑
86.31
83.73
76.94
86.99
75.04
89.11
83.02
GS-ICP-
SLAM
F-Score ↑
82.42
69.43
53.63
77.68
71.45
77.65
72.04
Acc. ↓
09.19
13.78
27.49
11.85
19.65
14.62
16.10
Comp. ↓
05.73
08.92
08.65
08.22
15.19
08.81
09.25
Comp. Rat. ↑
63.84
46.23
45.29
45.71
26.31
47.55
45.82
CaRtGS
F-Score ↑
51.19
37.47
31.18
37.24
22.55
39.02
36.44
Acc. ↓
02.70
10.14
25.25
07.29
04.01
08.80
09.70
Comp. ↓
02.11
02.88
03.03
02.31
02.22
02.28
02.47
Comp. Rat. ↑
95.71
87.70
87.56
91.33
92.42
92.71
91.24
Ours
F-Score ↑
93.94
70.26
60.16
79.33
88.16
82.75
79.10
that appear blurred in the original color observation.
C. Geometry: Mesh Reconstruction
To obtain the meshes, we rendered depth images from
3DGS and performed TSDF-Fusion at a consistent resolution
of 0.01m for all methods. While HI-SLAM2 incorporates
monocular depth estimation, as a monocular 3DGS method,
it is excluded from geometric evaluation. Furthermore, we
conduct validation exclusively on the ScanNet dataset, as all
methods achieve near-optimal performance on Replica.
The quantitative results are summarized in Tab. IV. All
methods demonstrate generally worse Acc. than Comp., at-
tributable to ScanNet’s conservative ground truth mesh that
excludes certain regions. Despite this, it maintains strong
performance through its canonical Gaussian initialization and
higher-order geometric signal supervision. In contrast, GSFu-
sion and CaRtGS produce the poorest results, as they prioritize
rendering quality over effective depth image supervision, lead-
ing to suboptimal mesh reconstruction.
Qualitative results are displayed in Fig. 9. All methods ex-
cept OmniMap show misaligned artifacts and uneven surfaces,
primarily caused by noisy depth images and inter-frame depth
inconsistencies. OmniMap inherits the effect of normal con-
sistency across viewpoints, producing smoother meshes. The
close-up visualization further illustrates OmniMap’s advantage
in reconstructing thin structures, such as chair legs, and
TABLE V: Zero-shot semantic evaluations on Replica dataset.
Method
Metric
ro-0
ro-1
ro-2
of-0
of-1
of-2
of-3
of-4
Avg.
mIoU↑
11.64 03.82 09.04 06.06 04.97 02.10 05.55 11.36 06.82
fIoU↑
31.07 10.44 22.17 10.14 15.32 03.15 07.00 24.00 15.41
mAcc ↑29.39 11.13 19.67 10.07 20.36 07.01 11.45 24.16 16.66
Open
Gaussian
fAcc ↑
05.96 14.35 28.09 12.24 16.90 04.92 07.90 24.31 18.08
mIoU↑
12.62 11.30 10.48 10.40 05.38 10.33 09.55 09.91 10.00
fIoU↑
47.83 47.74 41.56 29.69 24.49 54.13 44.79 27.29 39.69
mAcc ↑26.76 28.71 25.09 21.85 14.73 22.71 19.90 23.68 22.93
Lang
Splat
fAcc ↑
53.77 53.70 50.51 31.94 28.57 56.78 50.24 27.77 44.16
mIoU↑
16.74 08.25 14.13 11.35 02.77 11.13 14.79 04.17 10.42
fIoU↑
55.05 30.75 48.56 51.38 14.12 45.22 45.37 50.88 42.67
mAcc ↑32.92 21.74 32.45 33.51 08.89 22.12 27.92 10.80 23.79
Grasp
Splats
fAcc ↑
66.82 45.24 65.38 59.56 22.42 52.92 54.60 52.13 52.39
mIoU↑
07.96 08.86 02.57 04.66 03.82 02.93 03.53 03.68 04.75
fIoU↑
32.28 34.86 31.65 23.45 20.35 23.35 19.15 17.29 25.30
mAcc ↑25.41 31.04 07.59 17.42 23.38 12.13 16.65 20.71 19.29
Concept
Fusion
fAcc ↑
38.11 42.19 37.44 24.86 22.82 24.43 21.85 20.23 28.99
mIoU↑
22.53 18.74 14.66 19.36 11.22 15.75 11.66 17.74 16.46
fIoU↑
50.28 46.21 54.52 43.87 22.00 23.25 11.32 34.07 35.69
mAcc ↑38.88 36.57 25.10 29.32 22.54 33.65 28.43 37.56 31.51
Concept
Graph
fAcc ↑
59.65 57.93 62.64 50.21 25.64 27.78 16.05 39.63 42.44
mIoU↑
36.26 29.00 24.13 19.14 22.69 23.88 15.28 19.89 23.79
fIoU↑
71.24 51.95 62.52 44.05 49.50 46.28 20.95 44.42 48.86
mAcc ↑49.68 52.96 39.79 30.60 40.28 35.16 28.86 39.36 39.59
HOV-SG
fAcc ↑
81.69 61.36 72.31 46.72 59.72 47.81 24.90 46.71 55.15
mIoU↑
22.17 16.64 21.94 08.95 12.78 12.36 18.10 18.00 16.37
fIoU↑
60.17 41.62 61.72 49.64 33.86 48.22 53.00 64.93 51.65
mAcc ↑41.65 41.39 43.03 25.61 30.01 26.99 32.14 40.40 35.15
Open
Fusion
fAcc ↑
72.78 54.68 73.71 60.10 37.01 52.82 62.53 69.33 60.37
mIoU↑
49.57 42.63 26.50 21.92 21.32 24.45 23.31 22.82 29.06
fIoU↑
70.73 57.89 65.56 62.37 52.14 76.53 62.30 67.85 64.42
mAcc ↑62.94 61.68 41.04 38.28 32.76 39.42 37.17 43.03 44.54
Ours
fAcc ↑
82.29 69.93 74.66 71.40 55.29 81.94 70.85 71.37 72.22
continuous geometries, like garbage cans. Notably, OmniMap
surpasses GT mesh quality in certain cases (e.g., the display
screen in scene0207 00) by inferring depth values from multi-
view RGB observations that appear missing in the original
depth observations.
D. Semantics: Zero-shot Segmentation
Beyond ensuring high-fidelity geometry and appearance
reconstruction, OmniMap preserves instance-level scene un-
derstanding through its voxel representations V and embedded
codebook B. We evaluate OmniMap against various offline
and online open-vocabulary approaches by assessing their
zero-shot semantic segmentation performance. Using dataset-
provided semantic labels as query texts, we assign each
map element the label with maximum embedding similarity,
formulating the evaluation as a 3D multi-class classification
task.
Tab. V and Tab. VI summarize the qualitative results of
semantic segmentation on the two datasets. OmniMap outper-
forms all baselines, owing to its unique probabilistic voxel
representation, which enhances robustness to noise. For visu-
alization purposes, we assign distinct colors to each semantic
label and display the segmentation results in Fig. 10. Built
upon the YOLO-World model [54], OmniMap specifically fo-
cuses on foreground object segmentation, which is particularly
valuable for robotic applications. The qualitative comparison

<!-- page 14 -->
14
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
RGB
GT
Ours
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
RGB
GT
Ours
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
RGB
GT
Ours
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
RTG-SLAM
Gaussian-SLAM
MonoGS
SplaTAM
GSFusion
RGB
GT
Ours
CaRtGS
GS-ICP-SLAM
scene0181_00
scene0000_00
scene0207_00
scene0059_00
Fig. 9: Mesh reconstruction quality comparison. OmniMap generates notably smoother surfaces and more geometrically precise reconstruc-
tions, particularly excelling in both continuous surface representation and fine structural detail recovery.
highlights OmniMap’s advantage in semantic understanding.
Point-wise feature fields like LangSplat struggle to distinguish
between instances, while ConceptGraph and HOV-SG, though
incorporating instance notions, suffer from redundant under-
segmentation due to simple point-cloud IoU-based instance
associations. In contrast, OmniMap achieves nearly identical
results to the GT, demonstrating competitive performance in
both segmentation and classification tasks.
E. Efficiency: Frame Rate and Model Size
For real-time applications across diverse robotic platforms,
frame rate and model size serve as critical metrics for evalu-
ating algorithm performance. While theoretically any method
could achieve improved results through excessive Gaussian
primitives (increasing model size) or extended per-frame
optimization (reducing frame rate), such approaches prove
impractical for real-world deployment. To verify that Omn-
iMap maintains efficient construction while delivering high-
quality reconstructions, we measure both build frame rate and
model size in Tab. VII, alongside rendering and reconstruction
metrics for reference. Experimental results demonstrate that
OmniMap achieves an optimal balance between real-time
performance (FPS), model compactness, and reconstruction
quality compared to all baseline methods. This confirms Omn-

<!-- page 15 -->
15
OpenGaussian
LangSplat
GraspSplats 
ConceptFusion
ConceptGraph
RGB
GT
Ours
HOV-SG
OpenFusion
OpenGaussian
LangSplat
GraspSplats 
ConceptFusion
ConceptGraph
RGB
GT
Ours
HOV-SG
OpenFusion
OpenGaussian
LangSplat
GraspSplats 
ConceptFusion
ConceptGraph
RGB
GT
Ours
HOV-SG
OpenFusion
OpenGaussian
LangSplat
GraspSplats 
ConceptFusion
ConceptGraph
RGB
GT
Ours
HOV-SG
OpenFusion
cabinet
basket
bed
blanket
blinds
chair
void
clock
curtain
ceiling
door
floor
plant
lamp
rug
picture
sculp.
sofa
swith
table
vase
wall
window
office_2
scene0059_00
room_0
scene0181_00
...
Fig. 10: Zero-shot semantic segmentation results. OmniMap’s probabilistic voxel representation demonstrates robustness to sensor noise
while maintaining accurate object segmentation and scene understanding capabilities.
iMap’s ability to maintain high mapping performance without
compromising efficiency.
F. Ablation Study
To evaluate the effectiveness of the proposed components,
we conducted an ablation study for ScanNet’s scene0181 00
and report the results in Tab. VIII. The significance of prob-
abilistic voxel representation for open-vocabulary semantics
has been established in Subsection VII-D. We further evaluate
three additional key modules’ impact on rendering and re-
construction. Our quantitative analysis demonstrates that: (1)
removal of the camera parameter modeling module leads to
significant degradation in rendering quality, particularly in un-
certain real-world environments; (2) while normal supervision
removal has minimal impact on quantitative rendering metrics,
it substantially reduces mesh accuracy, with qualitative results
showing pronounced deterioration (see Fig. 7); and (3) elim-
ination of the keyframe buffer results in noticeable declines
in both optical and geometric performance due to catastrophic
forgetting effects.
We further evaluate the impact of two key parameters on
mapping performance: voxel resolution and instance fusion
threshold. Voxel resolution directly determines the number of
Gaussian primitives, influencing both rendering quality and
mesh accuracy, while the instance fusion threshold governs
instance segmentation granularity. As shown in Fig. 11, in-
creasing the voxel size reduces model complexity (through
fewer Gaussian primitives) while marginally decreasing op-

<!-- page 16 -->
16
TABLE VI: Zero-shot semantic evaluations on ScanNet dataset.
Method
Metric
0000
0059
0106
0169
0181
0207
Avg.
mIoU↑
10.84
05.83
09.08
09.29
11.38
05.44
08.64
fIoU↑
18.52
27.51
15.67
54.55
19.59
06.44
23.71
mAcc ↑
21.82
12.75
22.55
17.15
24.41
08.50
17.86
Open
Gaussian
fAcc ↑
22.68
30.08
17.92
57.10
23.59
07.25
26.44
mIoU↑
06.72
07.41
08.55
06.02
11.13
03.48
07.22
fIoU↑
20.03
46.98
29.48
43.60
23.06
02.38
27.59
mAcc ↑
18.99
22.48
25.14
25.39
28.87
05.18
21.01
Lang
Splat
fAcc ↑
26.26
52.80
36.09
47.34
28.21
02.54
32.21
mIoU↑
06.27
08.22
06.46
08.40
05.53
05.27
06.69
fIoU↑
08.39
25.88
19.26
30.77
07.58
07.82
16.62
mAcc ↑
12.27
20.24
09.46
26.28
10.80
10.29
14.89
Grasp
Splats
fAcc ↑
09.60
28.87
21.12
38.66
09.79
09.40
19.57
mIoU↑
11.13
05.48
09.55
06.15
09.92
08.77
08.50
fIoU↑
23.70
32.18
37.65
42.38
29.15
15.24
30.05
mAcc ↑
34.92
28.69
37.16
30.35
35.65
24.06
31.81
Concept
Fusion
fAcc ↑
31.50
37.36
45.10
47.92
36.52
21.41
36.64
mIoU↑
15.38
16.06
18.57
17.78
16.55
13.42
16.29
fIoU↑
16.17
42.06
39.11
52.52
30.56
19.31
33.29
mAcc ↑
35.69
32.87
40.52
37.67
32.09
25.60
34.07
Concept
Graph
fAcc ↑
21.84
53.36
47.93
64.08
38.27
24.15
41.60
mIoU↑
24.57
18.19
22.90
25.49
16.52
16.92
20.76
fIoU↑
31.93
42.53
37.66
58.84
28.58
30.51
38.34
mAcc ↑
46.78
37.98
47.41
45.21
37.08
34.56
41.50
HOV-SG
fAcc ↑
38.74
51.73
42.41
69.97
33.47
36.65
45.50
mIoU↑
18.58
12.09
15.76
19.32
21.26
21.11
18.02
fIoU↑
28.56
48.04
36.22
59.03
50.44
40.60
43.82
mAcc ↑
47.85
44.21
42.95
39.06
43.27
48.52
44.31
Open
Fusion
fAcc ↑
38.84
56.89
39.51
62.63
57.10
51.56
51.09
mIoU↑
20.25
14.81
38.44
24.41
33.04
21.59
25.42
fIoU↑
34.24
53.59
64.18
57.34
54.96
40.86
50.86
mAcc ↑
49.81
47.36
62.37
41.43
61.61
42.99
50.93
Ours
fAcc ↑
40.95
61.26
71.72
62.77
59.90
45.68
57.05
TABLE VII: Comparisons of mapping efficiency and model size.
Dataset
Replica
Scannet
Metric
PSNR ↑FPS ↑Size ↓PSNR ↑F-Score ↑FPS ↑Size ↓
RTG-SLAM
32.21
2.34
163.4
18.11
67.93
0.91
460.0
Gaussian-SLAM
36.37
1.93
81.4
23.35
60.24
2.35
59.8
MonoGS
36.23
0.73
10.5
18.88
72.20
0.90
15.2
SplaTAM
34.81
0.30
58.1
19.09
76.42
0.47
181.5
GSFusion
34.70
3.91
36.2
19.03
46.95
5.22
86.7
GS-ICP-SLAM
37.47
6.56
21.6
20.34
72.04
7.01
25.0
CaRtGS
34.88
5.24
23.7
19.12
36.44
9.98
18.2
HI-SLAM2
36.59
5.68
11.6
23.37
-
3.00
10.6
Ours
39.48
5.43
14.2
26.04
79.10
5.55
40.5
TABLE VIII: Results of ablation study.
Metric
PSNR ↑
F-Score ↑
w/o camera modeling
25.07
86.81
w/o normal loss
26.29
84.56
w/o keyframe buffer
21.16
86.46
Full OmniMap
26.33
88.16
tical and geometric accuracy, enabling a practical accuracy-
efficiency trade-off. Notably, OmniMap with a voxel resolution
of 0.06m achieves minimal model size (6.2 MB only), while
still maintaining the highest rendering and mesh accuracy.
Although higher fusion thresholds affect semantic accuracy
to some degree, the impact remains within acceptable bounds,
demonstrating OmniMap’s robustness to parameter variations
in probabilistic modeling. The bottom row of Fig. 11 illustrates
RGB
0.1
0.2
0.3
0.4
Fig. 11: The impact of two key parameters on mapping performance:
voxel resolution and instance fusion threshold. The bottom row shows
the final instance-level maps for different fusion thresholds.
 The mural is actually a black-and-
white framed photograph. It depicts a 
boat resting near the water's edge 
amidst grass and calm water, giving 
off a serene and tranquil atmosphere.
What does the mural in room_0 
depict or represent?
1. Extract scene and retrieve object.
2. Pick the optimal rendering view.
3. Render the image from 3DGS. 
4. Perform visual Q&A.
Fig. 12: The process of 2D Scene Q&A. OmniMap enables scene
understanding and question answering through object retrieval and
image rendering capabilities, augmented by VQA techniques.
fusion results at varying thresholds, highlighting differences in
challenging cases such as box bases on couches, adjacent trash
cans, and highly overlapping tables and chairs.
VIII. APPLICATIONS
OmniMap’s unified representation of optical, geometric,
and semantic information provides inherent advantages for
supporting diverse downstream applications. This integrated
framework naturally enables multiple use cases, including (1)
Scene Q&A, (2) Interactive Editing, (3) Perception-guided
Manipulation, and (4) Map-assisted Navigation.
A. Scene Q&A
After
completing
environmental
reconstruction,
scene
quizzing serves as an effective tool for validating representa-
tion quality. User queries typically target specific object-level
information, demanding rapid localization of relevant objects
and extraction of fine-grained attributes like appearance. Fig.
12 demonstrates OmniMap’s Scene Q&A pipeline with the
following workflow:
1. Object retrieval: Leveraging the embedded codebook,
we employ feature similarity matching to efficiently retrieve

<!-- page 17 -->
17
What's on the bed 
in scene0207_00?
 The bed has a pillow, a white 
sheet, and a green blanket on it.
Does the toilet in 
scene0000_00 has an 
open or closed lid?
The toilet has a closed lid.
What is the length 
and width of the 
table in room_2?
The size is 2.0m*1.0m.
How far is the blue 
sculpture in from the 
table in office_0 ?
The inter-center distance is 2.29 m.
Fig. 13: More demonstrations of Scene Q&A across 2D and 3D
modalities.
the most relevant object ID and localize its corresponding
voxels.
2. Viewpoint selection: As visual perception dominates
scene understanding, we project the identified voxels across
multiple camera poses. By comparing projection depth with
rendering depth, we select the optimal viewpoint maximizing
valid voxel projections.
3. Image rendering: The 3DGS field is rendered at the
chosen viewpoint to generate RGB and optional depth images
(for 3D-related queries).
4. Visual Q&A: Utilizing Multimodal Large Language
Models (MLLMs) capabilities, we provide comprehensive
responses to user queries. An optional feedback mechanism
dynamically adjusts rendering viewpoints during Q&A to
enhance visual representation.
Beyond basic 2D scene Q&A, OmniMap inherently sup-
ports 3D queries, enabling object dimension measurement
and inter-object distance calculation. Fig. 13 demonstrates
additional scene query results encompassing both 2D and 3D
capabilities.
B. Interactive Editing
Thanks to OmniMap’s instance-level scene decomposition
and semantic understanding, we enable intuitive interactive
scene editing with free-viewpoint rendering. Specifically, given
an object-level editing command, we first retrieve the target
object’s voxels. These voxels are then filtered by a distance
threshold and passed to the 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS)
field to extract the associated Gaussian primitives. By directly
manipulating these primitives, the modified Gaussian field
can be rendered from any viewpoint. Supported edits include
color alteration, removal, duplication, and relocation, as il-
lustrated in Fig. 14. This interactive editing capability allows
OmniMap to efficiently generate diverse scene layouts and
visual appearances while maintaining high-fidelity rendering
color alteration
removal
relocation
duplication
Fig. 14: Scene editing demonstration. Through object querying and
direct manipulation of Gaussian primitives, our framework enables
flexible scene modification with multi-view rendering capabilities.
quality, offering an efficient approach to address critical data
augmentation challenges in embodied intelligence research.
C.
Perception-guided Manipulation
Beyond interactive mapping applications, OmniMap demon-
strates direct hardware control capabilities for robotic systems.
We first validated this through robotic arm manipulation
experiments. As illustrated in Fig. 15, an Orbbec Astra Pro
camera was mounted on the end-effector of a Franka robotic
arm. When presented with the user command ‘Please help
me put the mango in the pot and the apple on the pan’, the
system executed a comprehensive tabletop scanning procedure:
the robotic arm maneuvered the camera around the workspace,
enabling OmniMap to perform rapid incremental reconstruc-
tion. The camera pose was precisely determined through end-
effector tracking combined with calibrated extrinsic parame-
ters.
This process yielded not only a complete geometric map but
also a semantic understanding of the objects within the scene.
OmniMap then localized the task-relevant objects (mango, pot,
apple, and pan) within the reconstructed environment. Lever-
aging LLM-based task decomposition, the system successfully
guided the robotic arm through sequential operations to com-
plete the requested tasks with precise object manipulation.
D. Map-assisted Navigation
We conducted real-world validation of OmniMap’s ef-
fectiveness in an office environment using both a wheeled
robot and a quadruped robotic platform. The wheeled robot,
equipped with an Azure Kinect RGB-D camera and an on-
board computing system (featuring an RTX 3090 GPU), uti-
lized Livox MID-360 LiDAR SLAM along with multi-sensor
calibration technology to generate images’ poses while simul-
taneously streaming RGB-D data to OmniMap for processing.
OmniMap successfully performs online environment recon-
struction as the robot traverses the scene. As illustrated in
Fig. 16, the system demonstrates robust real-time mapping
performance and produces high-quality reconstruction results.
Notably, despite challenging conditions including ground sur-
face reflections, non-uniform lighting distribution, and clut-
tered objects, OmniMap maintains remarkable reconstruction

<!-- page 18 -->
18
Please help me put the mango in the pot and the apple on the pan.
1. Data acquisition and online mapping
2. Mission analysis and retrieval of related objects
mango
pot
apple
pan
3. Manipulate objects
Fig. 15: OmniMap supports robotic arm operations by reconstructing
workspace optics, geometry, and semantics through end-effector-
mounted camera scanning, enabling task completion.
fidelity, with its real-time rendered output closely matching
the actual RGB feed. This achievement highlights the system’s
exceptional perceptual capabilities. Furthermore, the randomly
color-coded instance mapping results provide compelling ev-
idence of OmniMap’s superior performance in real-world ap-
plications involving simultaneous instance detection, semantic
segmentation, and environmental reconstruction tasks.
To validate the practical deployment of the reconstructed
map, we implemented it on a quadruped robot equipped with
a 6-DOF manipulator. As shown in Fig. 16, when given the
natural language command ‘Please help me take the apple to
the other mobile robot’, the system successfully identified and
localized both target objects, the apple and the robot, through
LLM-based semantic parsing. The robot then autonomously
planned and executed a collision-free trajectory using the
generated obstacle map, demonstrating precise navigation and
manipulation capabilities as it grasped and transported the
apple to the specified target location. This complete functional
chain from perception to action conclusively verifies the
operational readiness of our mapping system for real-world
service robotics applications.
IX. CONCLUSION
In this work, we present OmniMap, a general framework for
online mapping that simultaneously incorporates optical (high-
fidelity rendering), geometric (fine-grained mesh), and se-
mantic (open-vocabulary understanding) representations. The
framework introduces several key innovations, including hy-
brid 3DGS-Voxel architecture, differentiable camera parameter
modeling, voxel-based Gaussian initialization, higher-order
geometric signal supervision, and probabilistic instance-level
reconstruction. These technical advances enable OmniMap to
achieve comprehensive optimization across all performance
metrics in nearly all scenes. Efficiency evaluations demonstrate
Please help me take 
the apple to the other 
mobile robot.
apple
robot
LiDAR
Computing 
Platform
RGBD 
Camera
Mobile 
Power
Wheeled
Robot
Screen 
Robot Arm
Quadruped 
Robot
LiDAR
A. Wheeled robot builds the map online
B. Quadrupedal robot executes user command
Fig. 16: OmniMap enables mobile robot navigation experiments. A
wheeled robot performs environmental scanning to generate com-
prehensive scene reconstruction and semantic understanding, while
a quadruped robot with a manipulator utilizes this representation to
complete user-specified tasks within the mapped environment.
that OmniMap accomplishes these results without compromis-
ing computational efficiency or memory usage, with ablation
studies confirming that even with significantly reduced model
sizes, the system maintains high accuracy. Furthermore, the
unified nature of OmniMap supports diverse downstream ap-
plications such as scene-based multi-domain question answer-
ing, interactive scene editing, robotic arm manipulation, and
mobile robot navigation.
However, OmniMap currently has limitations: its mapping
quality depends on external positioning systems due to the
lack of an integrated tracking module, and it cannot effectively
handle dynamic scenes. Future work will focus on developing
an integrated tracking module and implementing dynamic
instance discrimination to transform OmniMap into a more
versatile, plug-and-play scene representation solution.
REFERENCES
[1] A. Hornung, K. M. Wurm, M. Bennewitz, et al., “Octomap: An efficient
probabilistic 3d mapping framework based on octrees,” Autonomous
robots, vol. 34, no. 3, pp. 189–206, 2013.
[2] H. Oleynikova, Z. Taylor, M. Fehr, et al., “Voxblox: Incremental 3d
euclidean signed distance fields for on-board mav planning,” in 2017
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 1366–1373.
IEEE, 2017.
[3] R. A. Newcombe, S. Izadi, O. Hilliges, et al., “Kinectfusion: Real-time
dense surface mapping and tracking,” in 2011 10th IEEE international
symposium on mixed and augmented reality, pp. 127–136.
Ieee, 2011.
[4] A. Dai, M. Nießner, M. Zollh¨ofer, et al., “Bundlefusion: Real-time glob-
ally consistent 3d reconstruction using on-the-fly surface reintegration,”
ACM Transactions on Graphics (ToG), vol. 36, no. 4, p. 1, 2017.
[5] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, et al., “Nerf: Representing
scenes as neural radiance fields for view synthesis,” Communications of
the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106, 2021.

<!-- page 19 -->
19
[6] B. Kerbl, G. Kopanas, T. Leimk¨uhler, et al., “3d gaussian splatting
for real-time radiance field rendering,” ACM Transactions on Graphics,
vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2023.
[7] Q. Gu, A. Kuwajerwala, S. Morin, et al., “Conceptgraphs: Open-
vocabulary 3d scene graphs for perception and planning,” in 2016 IEEE
international conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE,
2024.
[8] A. Werby, C. Huang, M. B¨uchner, et al., “Hierarchical Open-Vocabulary
3D Scene Graphs for Language-Grounded Robot Navigation,” in Pro-
ceedings of Robotics: Science and Systems, Delft, Netherlands, Jul. 2024.
[9] J. Kerr, C. M. Kim, K. Goldberg, et al., “Lerf: Language embedded radi-
ance fields,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International Conference
on Computer Vision, pp. 19 729–19 739, 2023.
[10] M. Qin, W. Li, J. Zhou, et al., “Langsplat: 3d language gaussian
splatting,” in IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), 2024.
[11] Y. Cai, F. Kong, Y. Ren, et al., “Occupancy grid mapping without
ray-casting for high-resolution lidar sensors,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 172–192, 2023.
[12] G. Chen, W. Dong, P. Peng, et al., “Continuous occupancy mapping in
dynamic environments using particles,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 40, pp. 64–84, 2023.
[13] Y. Yuan and A. N¨uchter, “Uni-fusion: Universal continuous mapping,”
IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 40, pp. 1373–1392, 2024.
[14] Y. Deng, M. Wang, Y. Yang, et al., “See-csom: Sharp-edged and
efficient continuous semantic occupancy mapping for mobile robots,”
IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, 2023.
[15] A. Asgharivaskasi and N. Atanasov, “Semantic octree mapping and
shannon mutual information computation for robot exploration,” IEEE
Transactions on Robotics, vol. 39, no. 3, pp. 1910–1928, 2023.
[16] Y. Deng, M. Wang, Y. Yang, et al., “Hd-ccsom: Hierarchical and dense
collaborative continuous semantic occupancy mapping through label
diffusion,” in 2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent
Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 2417–2422.
IEEE, 2022.
[17] V. Yugay, Y. Li, T. Gevers, et al., “Gaussian-slam: Photo-realistic dense
slam with gaussian splatting,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.10070, 2023.
[18] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, et al., “Splatam: Splat
track & map 3d gaussians for dense rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp.
21 357–21 366, 2024.
[19] H. Matsuki, R. Murai, P. H. Kelly, et al., “Gaussian splatting slam,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, pp. 18 039–18 048, 2024.
[20] K. Jatavallabhula, A. Kuwajerwala, Q. Gu, et al., “Conceptfusion: Open-
set multimodal 3d mapping,” Robotics: Science and Systems (RSS),
2023.
[21] Y. Deng, J. Wang, J. Zhao, et al., “Opengraph: Open-vocabulary hier-
archical 3d graph representation in large-scale outdoor environments,”
IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 9, no. 10, pp. 8402–8409,
2024.
[22] Y. Tang, M. Wang, Y. Deng, et al., “Openin: Open-vocabulary instance-
oriented navigation in dynamic domestic environments,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, no. 99, pp. 1–8, 2025.
[23] J. Wei and S. Leutenegger, “Gsfusion: Online rgb-d mapping where
gaussian splatting meets tsdf fusion,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 2024.
[24] Z. Zhu, S. Peng, V. Larsson, et al., “Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable
encoding for slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12 786–12 796, 2022.
[25] L. Jin, X. Zhong, Y. Pan, et al., “Activegs: Active scene reconstruction
using gaussian splatting,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2025.
[26] L. Ma, X. Li, J. Liao, et al., “Deblur-nerf: Neural radiance fields from
blurry images,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer
vision and pattern recognition, pp. 12 861–12 870, 2022.
[27] B. Lee, H. Lee, X. Sun, et al., “Deblurring 3d gaussian splatting,” in
European Conference on Computer Vision, pp. 127–143.
Springer,
2024.
[28] L. Zhao, P. Wang, and P. Liu, “Bad-gaussians: Bundle adjusted deblur
gaussian splatting,” in European Conference on Computer Vision, pp.
233–250.
Springer, 2024.
[29] K. Yamazaki, T. Hanyu, K. Vo, et al., “Open-fusion: Real-time open-
vocabulary 3d mapping and queryable scene representation,” in 2024
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA),
pp. 9411–9417.
IEEE, 2024.
[30] D. Meyer-Delius, M. Beinhofer, and W. Burgard, “Occupancy grid
models for robot mapping in changing environments,” in Twenty-Sixth
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, 2012.
[31] Y. Tang, M. Wang, Y. Deng, et al., “Ssgm: Spatial semantic graph
matching for loop closure detection in indoor environments,” in 2023
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems
(IROS), pp. 9163–9168.
IEEE, 2023.
[32] Y. Tang, M. Wang, Y. Deng, et al., “Multi-view robust collaborative
localization in high outlier ratio scenes based on semantic features,”
in 2023 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pp. 11 042–11 047.
IEEE, 2023.
[33] Y. Tang, M. Wang, Y. Yang, et al., “Robust large-scale collabora-
tive localization based on semantic submaps with extreme outliers,”
IEEE/ASME Transactions on Mechatronics, vol. 29, no. 4, pp. 2649–
2660, 2023.
[34] J. McCormac, A. Handa, A. Davison, et al., “Semanticfusion: Dense 3d
semantic mapping with convolutional neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and automation (ICRA), pp. 4628–
4635.
IEEE, 2017.
[35] S. Kim and J. Kim, “Gpmap: A unified framework for robotic mapping
based on sparse gaussian processes,” in Field and Service Robotics:
Results of the 9th International Conference, pp. 319–332.
Springer,
2015.
[36] F. Ramos and L. Ott, “Hilbert maps: Scalable continuous occupancy
mapping with stochastic gradient descent,” The International Journal of
Robotics Research, vol. 35, no. 14, pp. 1717–1730, 2016.
[37] T. Shan, J. Wang, B. Englot, et al., “Bayesian generalized kernel
inference for terrain traversability mapping,” in Conference on Robot
Learning, pp. 829–838.
PMLR, 2018.
[38] Y. Deng, M. Wang, D. Wang, et al., “S-mki: Incremental dense semantic
occupancy reconstruction through multi-entropy kernel inference,” in
2022 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pp. 3824–3829.
IEEE, 2022.
[39] Y. Yue, Y. Deng, Y. Tang, et al., “Lgsdf: Continual global learning
of signed distance fields aided by local updating,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 2025.
[40] Y. Deng, Y. Tang, Y. Yang, et al., “Macim: Multi-agent collaborative
implicit mapping,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[41] E. Sucar, S. Liu, J. Ortiz, et al., “imap: Implicit mapping and positioning
in real-time,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international conference
on computer vision, pp. 6229–6238, 2021.
[42] C. Yan, D. Qu, D. Xu, et al., “Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d
gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 19 595–19 604, 2024.
[43] Z. Peng, T. Shao, Y. Liu, et al., “Rtg-slam: Real-time 3d reconstruction
at scale using gaussian splatting,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2024 Conference
Papers, pp. 1–11, 2024.
[44] E. Sandstr¨om, G. Zhang, K. Tateno, et al., “Splat-slam: Globally
optimized rgb-only slam with 3d gaussians,” in Proceedings of the
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Conference, pp. 1680–1691,
2025.
[45] S. Ha, J. Yeon, and H. Yu, “Rgbd gs-icp slam,” in European Conference
on Computer Vision, pp. 180–197.
Springer, 2024.
[46] D. Feng, Z. Chen, Y. Yin, et al., “Cartgs: Computational alignment
for real-time gaussian splatting slam,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, 2025.
[47] W. Zhang, Q. Cheng, D. Skuddis, et al., “Hi-slam2: Geometry-aware
gaussian slam for fast monocular scene reconstruction,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.17982, 2024.
[48] S. Kobayashi, E. Matsumoto, and V. Sitzmann, “Decomposing nerf for
editing via feature field distillation,” Advances in Neural Information
Processing Systems, vol. 35, pp. 23 311–23 330, 2022.
[49] Y. Deng, J. Wang, J. Zhao, et al., “Openobj: Open-vocabulary object-
level neural radiance fields with fine-grained understanding,” IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[50] J. Dou, Y. Deng, J. Wang, et al., “Openmulti: Open-vocabulary instance-
level multi-agent distributed implicit mapping,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 2025.
[51] M. Ye, M. Danelljan, F. Yu, et al., “Gaussian grouping: Segment and edit
anything in 3d scenes,” in European Conference on Computer Vision,
pp. 162–179.
Springer, 2024.
[52] Y. Wu, J. Meng, H. Li, et al., “Opengaussian: Towards point-level 3d
gaussian-based open vocabulary understanding,” Advances in Neural
Information Processing Systems, vol. 37, pp. 19 114–19 138, 2024.
[53] Y. Deng, B. Yao, Y. Tang, et al., “Openvox: Real-time instance-level
open-vocabulary probabilistic voxel representation,” in 2025 IEEE/RSJ
International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2025.

<!-- page 20 -->
20
[54] T. Cheng, L. Song, Y. Ge, et al., “Yolo-world: Real-time open-
vocabulary object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Confer-
ence on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, pp. 16 901–16 911,
2024.
[55] T. Pan, L. Tang, X. Wang, et al., “Tokenize anything via prompting,” in
Proceedings of the European conference on computer vision (ECCV),
2024.
[56] N. Reimers and I. Gurevych, “Sentence-bert: Sentence embeddings using
siamese bert-networks,” in Proceedings of the 2019 Conference on
Empirical Methods in Natural Language Processing, 11 2019.
[57] B. Curless and M. Levoy, “A volumetric method for building complex
models from range images,” in Proceedings of the 23rd annual confer-
ence on Computer graphics and interactive techniques, pp. 303–312,
1996.
[58] L. Gan, R. Zhang, J. W. Grizzle, et al., “Bayesian spatial kernel
smoothing for scalable dense semantic mapping,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 2, pp. 790–797, 2020.
[59] M. Ji, R.-Z. Qiu, X. Zou, et al., “Graspsplats: Efficient manipulation
with 3d feature splatting,” in Conference on Robot Learning, 2024.
[60] J. Straub, T. Whelan, L. Ma, et al., “The replica dataset: A digital replica
of indoor spaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1906.05797, 2019.
[61] A. Dai, A. X. Chang, M. Savva, et al., “Scannet: Richly-annotated 3d
reconstructions of indoor scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE conference
on computer vision and pattern recognition, pp. 5828–5839, 2017.
Yinan Deng (Student Member, IEEE) received
the B.S. degree from Beijing Institute of Tech-
nology, Beijing, China, in 2021. He is currently
pursuing his Ph.D. degree in Control Science and
Engineering at the School of Automation, Bei-
jing Institute of Technology, China. He has pub-
lished 16 journal/conference papers, including IEEE
TRO/TIE/RAL/IROS. His research interests include
3D vision, open vocabulary scene reconstruction,
and embodied perception.
Yufeng Yue (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng.
degree in automation from the Beijing Institute
of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2014, and the
Ph.D. degree in electrical and electronic engineer-
ing from Nanyang Technological University, Sin-
gapore, in 2019. He is currently a Professor with
School of Automation, Beijing Institute of Tech-
nology. His research interests include perception,
mapping and navigation for autonomous robotics.
He has authored a book in Springer, and more
than 100 journal/conference papers, including IJRR,
IEEE TRO/TNNLS/TCSVT/TMech/TIE, and NeurIPS/CVPR/ICRA/IROS.
He serves as an Associate Editor for IEEE RAL/ICRA/IROS.
Jianyu Dou received the B.S. degree from Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2025. He
has just become a PhD student in Control Science
and Engineering at the School of Automation, Bei-
jing Institute of Technology, China. He has published
a journal paper on multi-agent collaborative map-
ping, and his current research interests focus on data
generation
Jingyu Zhao received the bachelor’s degree from
the Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing, China.
She is currently pursuing a master’s degree in control
science and engineering at the Beijing Institute of
Technology. Her research interests focus on 3D
scene reconstruction and understanding.
Jiahui Wang received the B.S. degree from Central
South University, Changsha, China, in 2023. He is
currently working toward the Ph.D. degree for the
second year in cognitive space AI with School of
Automation, Beijing Institute of Technology, Bei-
jing, China. His research interests include multi-
modal mapping and language embedded represen-
tation for robotic application.
Yujie Tang (Student Member, IEEE) received the
B.S. degree in automation from Beijing Institute
of Technology, Beijing, China, in 2021. He is cur-
rently working toward the Ph.D. degree in intelli-
gent navigation with School of Automation, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing, China. He has
published 10 journal/conference papers, including
TMech/RAL, and conferences like IROS. He has
received 2023/2024 IEEE ICUS Best Paper Award.
His research interests include robotics localization,
loop closure detection, cognitive navigation.
Yi Yang (Member, IEEE) received the B.Eng. de-
gree in automation and the M.S. degree in control
science and engineering from the Hebei University
of Technology, Tianjin, China, in 2001 and 2004,
respectively, and the Ph.D. degree in control science
and engineering from the Beijing Institute of Tech-
nology, Beijing, China, in 2010. He is currently a
Professor with the School of Automation, Beijing
Institute of Technology. His research interests in-
clude the areas of autonomous vehicles and robotics,
with focus on intelligent navigation, cross-domain
collaborative perception, and high mobility motion planning and control in
dynamic open environment.
Mengyin Fu (Member, IEEE) received the B.S.
degree from Liaoning University, China, the M.S.
degree from the Beijing Institute of Technology,
China, and the Ph.D. degree from the Chinese
Academy of Sciences. He was elected as an Aca-
demician of the Chinese Academy of Engineering
in 2021 and Yangtze River Scholar Distinguished
Professor in 2009. He is currently the President of
the Nanjing University of Science and Technology.
His research interests include integrated navigation,
intelligent navigation, image processing, learning,
and recognition, as well as their applications. Prof. Fu won the Guanghua
Engineering Science and Technology Award for Youth Award in 2010. In
recent years, he has received the National Science and Technology Progress
Award, for several times.
