<!-- page 1 -->
DyPho-SLAM : Real-time Photorealistic SLAM in
Dynamic Environments
Yi Liu1, Keyu Fan1, Bin Lan2, Houde Liu1,*,
1Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China
2Jianghuai Advance Technology Center, Hefei, China
Abstract—Visual
SLAM
algorithms
have
been
enhanced
through the exploration of Gaussian Splatting representations,
particularly in generating high-fidelity dense maps. While ex-
isting methods perform reliably in static environments, they
often encounter camera tracking drift and fuzzy mapping when
dealing with the disturbances caused by moving objects. This pa-
per presents DyPho-SLAM, a real-time, resource-efficient visual
SLAM system designed to address the challenges of localization
and photorealistic mapping in environments with dynamic ob-
jects. Specifically, the proposed system integrates prior image in-
formation to generate refined masks, effectively minimizing noise
from mask misjudgment. Additionally, to enhance constraints
for optimization after removing dynamic obstacles, we devise
adaptive feature extraction strategies significantly improving the
system’s resilience. Experiments conducted on publicly dynamic
RGB-D datasets demonstrate that the proposed system achieves
state-of-the-art performance in camera pose estimation and dense
map reconstruction, while operating in real-time in dynamic
scenes.
Index Terms—explicit map representation, dynamic SLAM,
visual SLAM
I. INTRODUCTION
Visual simultaneous localization and mapping (vSLAM),
which involves determining the pose of a vision sensor and
reconstructing the environment, is widely applied in the fields
of robotics, augmented reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR)
[1]. Moreover, compared to constructing sparse point clouds,
dense reconstruction offers substantial advantages in terms
of both accuracy and fidelity [2]. However, in real-world
scenes that contain dynamic objects, the traditional dense
SLAM algorithms could experience significant performance
degradation in terms of incorrect data associations [3].
Accomplishing dense SLAM tasks in dynamic environments
presents two key challenges: 1) The dynamic objects exclusion
strategies are imperfect [4], leading to local errors in localiza-
tion. 2) Remaining features are few in dynamic environments,
resulting in the reduced constraints for pose optimization
[5] and lack of density in reconstruction. To address these
challenges, this paper proposes a real-time precise localization
and high-fidelity mapping system in dynamic scenes. First,
we propose a refined mask generation strategy based on prior
image information, which comprehensively utilizes the accu-
mulation of past image frames to avoid missing dynamic object
masks in a single frame. Next, we develop a feature point
* Corresponding authors: Houde Liu (Emails: liu.hd@sz.tsinghua.edu.cn)
This paper was supported by Shenzhen Science Fund for Distinguished
Young Scholars under Grant RCJC20210706091946001.
E2XUV
D3KRWR6/$0
,,QSXW5*%')UDPHVZLWK'\QDPLF2EMHFW
,,&RQVWUXFWHG)HDWXUH3RLQW
,95HQGHU1HZ9LHZ
,,,7UDFNLQJ	*DXVVLDQ0DSSLQJ
E2XUV
D3KRWR6/$0
E2XUV
D3KRWR6/$0
Fig. 1. An example compares DyPho-SLAM with Photo-SLAM (Feature-GS)
on the bonn/ps track dataset. (I) The input RGBD images contain the moving
person. (II) presents a comparison of the effectiveness of the constructed
feature points, while (III) demonstrates the tracking results and the constructed
Gaussian. (IV) illustrates the effect of rendering a new view through Splatting.
selection method with compensation for sparse remaining
features, which enhances constraints for optimization. Finally,
we integrate mask and feature points into the explicit Gaussian
Splatting mapping process, achieving high-fidelity mapping in
a dynamic environment.
A. Related Work
Current research on dynamic-SLAM primarily focuses on
single-frame image detection, neglecting the correlation and
continuity between frames, and thus fails to achieve perfect
extraction across all frames. For example, ORB-SLAM3 [6]
uses re-sampling and residual optimization strategies to re-
move dynamic objects. Dyna-SLAM [7] employs semantic
extraction to extract dynamic object masks, while Rodyn-
SLAM [8] further integrates optical flow motion on this basis.
The missed masks in specific frames are then applied to dense
mapping methods, which can result in trajectory inaccuracies
arXiv:2509.00741v1  [cs.RO]  31 Aug 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
General Mask 
Prior Image 
  Information
Point Dense
Gaussian 
Created
Dynamic Process
Tracking
Mapping  
Loss
Mask
Segment
Motion
Input
RGBD
Assign
Process
T=[R|t]
BA Optimization
Feature 
Bin
Key ?
p
Adaptive 
Feature 
Mask 
Thres
Gaussian 
Pyramid
Feature Extractor
Feature Matcher
Yes
Gaussian 
Splatting
Gaussian 
Update
Gaussian 
Map
Bin 
Point
*
is prior image model defined by us
Fig. 2.
Pineline of our Dypho-SLAM: the “Dynamic Process” module III-A performs RGB-D image to extract mask, followed by general mask generation
and prior image refinement steps. Subsequently, the “Tracking” module III-B passes through the feature extractor, feature matcher, and pose optimization to
obtain the camera pose and feature bin. Finally, the “Mapping” module III-C continuously updates the Gaussian map by optimizing the loss function.
and some noise artifacts during the rendering process. Our pro-
posed DyPho-SLAM establishes a background model based on
previous images, achieving highly accurate mask generation
and reducing the noise present in dynamic mapping.
Considering the resource consumption issue of implicit
representation, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) framework
achieves rapid rendering requirements through explicit scene
representations [9], enabling its rapid development in the
field of dense SLAM [10]. MonoGS [11] and SplatAM [12]
simultaneously optimize tracking and Gaussian parameters to
accomplish SLAM tasks, while Photo-SLAM [13] initializes
with feature points as hyper-primitives and addresses the
speed issues in both tracking and mapping. Currently, dynamic
3DGS SLAM is still in a rapid exploratory stage. The latest
dynamic 3DGS SLAM algorithms, DGS-SLAM [14] and DG-
SLAM [15] fail to meet the requirements for real-time and
precise localization, resulting in the phenomenon of ghosting
artifacts in rendering.
B. Contributions
This work offers the following contributions:
1) We present an explicit representation-based framework
capable of achieving real-time camera tracking and high-
quality mapping in real-world dynamic environments.
2) We propose a high-quality mask generation strategy
based on prior image information and an adaptive point
selection method, resulting in accurate localization and
high-fidelity reconstruction.
3) Experiments on two challenging dynamic datasets
demonstrate Dypho-SLAM achieves state-of-the-art per-
formance in camera pose estimation and dense map
reconstruction, while operating in real-time.
II. OVERVIEW OF THE FRAMEWORK
A. Problem Statement
Given an image sequence I = {Ii|Ii = [Ci|Di]}N
i=1(Ii ∈
RH×W ×4, Ci
∈
RH×W ×3, Di
∈
RH×W ×1) containing
dynamic objects captured at a certain frame rate by an RGB-
D camera with known intrinsics K ∈R3×3, our objective
is to obtain their corresponding camera projection matrices
T = {T i|T i = [Ri|ti]}N
i=1, while updating Gaussian param-
eters G = {µj, αj, Σj, cj}n(G)
j=1 in every frame as follows:
I →T , G
(1)
where the camera orientation R ∈SO(3) and position t ∈R3
together form the camera’s projection matrix T ∈SE(3).
The Gaussian parameter is characterized by its spatial position
µj, opacity value αj, covariance matrix Σj, and spherical
harmonics-based color coefficients cj. The process of solving
T and G should satisfy: 1) minimizing absolute trajectory error
root mean square error. 2) optimal Gaussian rendering perfor-
mance for representing the static environment. 3) minimizing
the time and resources needed to complete the task.
B. System Framework
The structure of the proposed Dypho-SLAM algorithm com-
pletes real-time localization and photorealistic mapping tasks
in dynamic environments through a series of interconnected
processes, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. It primarily comprises
three modules: the “Dynamic Process” module III-A, the
“Tracking” module III-B, and the “Mapping” module III-C.
III. IMPLEMENTATION
A. Dynamic Process
1) Raw Mask Generation:
To distinguish between dynamic obstacles and the static

<!-- page 3 -->
environment, we need to obtain a mask of moving obstacles,
uniformly represented as M[∗](M[∗] ∈RH×W ×1), where 0
and 1 denote the presence and absence of a moving obstacle at
a pixel, respectively. We obtained the raw mask by overlaying
two mask generation methods as follows:
• Segment Mask: The method of obtaining a mask through
semantic segmentation provides precise segmentation for
image semantic understanding as follows:
fθ : {Ii}N
i=1 →{Mseg}N
i=1
(2)
where fθ is implemented as a YOLO network [16] with
trainable parameters θ trained on large-scale datasets.
• Motion
Mask: To mitigate the impact of out-of-
distribution moving objects on segment extraction, we
introduce the optical flow method. Specifically, we solve
for the optical flow vectors using the optical flow con-
straint equation as follows:
∂L
∂x u + ∂L
∂y v + ∂L
∂t = 0
(3)
where L(x, y, i) is the i-th image’s brightness function,
u and v are the components of optical flow vector.
After determining optical flow, we apply thresholds T to
identify motion masks on larger magnitudes, as follows:
MF low(x, y) =
0
||u(x, y) + v(x, y)||2 > T
1
otherwise
(4)
2) Optimized Mask via Prior Image Information:
The semantic and motion methods only focus on a single
image frame, ignoring the continuity between frames, which
can lead to mask misjudgments and result in significant
noise and ghosting in map construction. Here, we propose a
method for removing dynamic obstacles based on a prior static
background image model, which is specifically represented as
follows:
Bi = (1 −τ −ρ)Bi−1 + τRd(G, T i−1δT )
+ρ · Di(1 −MF low
M
MSegment)
(5)
where Bi(Bi ∈RH×W ×1) represents the depth static image
model of the i-th image and B1 is initialized by removing
the dynamic objects from the first depth image frame. τ and
ρ are hyperparameters, representing the degree of belief in
past renderings and the degree of trust in the segment mask
and flow motion mask, respectively. L is an assign process,
which can be simply processed through OR operation. Rd(·)
is a Gaussian rendering process to return depth image through
a Gaussian map and camera pose detailed as III-C2, and δT
is determined by a constant velocity camera model to estimate
a relative pose value as follows:
δT = T i−1T −1
i−2
(6)
Here, we obtain the final mask result by considering a point
as static if its neighboring depth value is similar to the value
in the static map model. Specifically:
M(x, y) =
1
n(|Bi,(x,y) −Di,(N(x,y))| < σm) > nm
0
otherwise
(7)
where N(·) returns the neighbors of (x, y). σm measures the
depth difference threshold. The function n(·) returns the count
of neighbors that satisfy the condition within (·), and nm
represents the threshold for this count.
B. Localization Algorithm
1) Feature Extract:
After obtaining the mask, we excluded the areas containing
dynamic obstacles. However, removing these dynamic obsta-
cles resulted in a decrease in feature points, which reduced the
constraints within the SLAM optimization problem, making
it underdetermined and degenerate. Consequently, localization
performance decreased compared to static environments. To
address the issue of fewer feature points in dynamic environ-
ments, we propose a dynamic feature sampling method based
on a generated mask on the Gaussian pyramid. A Gaussian
pyramid represents an image at multiple scales, capturing
varying levels of detail through a series of Gaussian smoothing
and downsampling operations applied iteratively to the original
image. When a pixel satisfies the following criteria, we define
it as a relaxed feature points specific to dynamic masking:
n(|Gi,(x,y) −Gi,(N(x,y))| < σdy) > nf
(8)
where G represents the grayscale image of the i-th frame
image at pixel (x, y), nf is a number value above which
a point can be considered as a feature point, and σdy is a
dynamic threshold used to adjust the number of feature points
in dynamic environments, which is expressed as:
σdy = σ0(1 −k
P M
H × W )
(9)
where σ0 represents the initial gray difference threshold, and
k is a parameter used to adjust the proportion of additional
feature points. This method ensures a stable number of feature
points as a bin after applying the mask, thereby achieving a
balance between processing speed and localization accuracy.
2) Pose Optimization:
In the localization process, we use a motion-only bundle ad-
justment to minimize the reprojection error between matched
2D geometric keypoint of the frame and 3D point, which we
are trying to optimize with LM algorithm [17] is
{Ri, ti} = arg minR,t
X
j∈M
ρh(eT
i,jΩ−1
i,j ei,j)
(10a)
where
ei,j = PI −πi(Ti, Pw,j)
(10b)
The error term ei,j is for the observation of a map point
j in i-th image which is optimized by minimizing robust
Huber cost function ρh(·). Ωi,j = ω2
i,jI2X2 is the scale-
associated covariance matrix of the keypoint. Pw represents the
coordinates in the world coordinate system, and PI represents
the matched pixel position in the camera coordinate system.
π(·) is the 3D-to-2D projection function as follows
πi(Ti, Pw,j) = KD−1
i,Pw(RPw,j + t)
(11)
Afterwards, loop closure detection is performed at the
keyframe to further optimize the pose.

<!-- page 4 -->
(a) fr3/w/xyz
(b) fr3/w/half
(c) fr3/w/static
(b) fr3/s/half
Fig. 3. Camera trajectories estimated by Photo-SLAM and ours in the TUM dataset sequences, and the differences from ground truth
TABLE I
CAMERA TRACKING RESULTS ON DYNAMIC SCENES FROM THE TUM RGB-D DATASET. THE UNITS FOR ATE(↓) AND STD.(↓) ARE IN CM. THE
BEST RESULTS AMONG ALL DOMAINS ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD. × REPRESENTS THAT THE CORRESPONDING DATA IS NOT IN THE ORIGINAL REPORT.
Method
Dense
fr3/w/xyz
fr3/w/half
fr3/w/static
fr3/s/half
Avg.
Feature-based SLAM methods
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ORB-SLAM3
28.1
12.2
0.31
9.0
2.0
1.1
2.6
1.6
15.8
6
Dyna-SLAM
1.7
×
2.6
×
0.7
×
2.8
×
2
×
NeRF-based SLAM methods
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
NICE-SLAM
✓
113.8
48.9
×
×
137.3
21.7
93.3
35.3
114.8
33.3
ESLAM
✓
45.7
28.5
60.8
27.9
93.6
20.7
3.6
1.6
34.5
13.5
RoDyn-SLAM
✓
8.3
5.5
5.6
2.8
1.7
0.9
4.4
2.2
4.1
2.3
3DGS-based SLAM methods
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
Splatam
✓
136.6
33.7
185.4
67.6
78.3
23.5
14.1
7.0
135.5
109.6
GS-SLAM
✓
37.2
9.9
60.0
20.7
8.4
4.1
7.4
5.4
28.5
10.0
GassiDy
✓
3.5
1.6
3.7
1.9
0.6
0.3
2.4
1.4
2.6
1.3
DGS-SLAM
✓
4.1
2.2
5.5
2.8
0.6
0.2
4.1
1.6
3.0
1.5
Feature-3DGS SLAM methods
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
ATE
Std.
Photo-SLAM
✓
88.3
48.9
33.5
9.3
9.4
6.3
3.2
1.4
33.6
16.3
Ours
✓
1.6
0.8
2.6
1.3
0.6
0.3
1.6
0.7
1.6
0.7
C. Mapping Algorithm
We employ the Gaussian map representation, which enables
the projection of 3D Gaussian volumes onto a 2D-pixel plane
through rasterization rendering, thereby generating images
from various viewpoints. The core task in this section is to
maintain the Gaussian parameters G = {µj, αj, Σj, cj}n(G)
j=1 .
1) Incrementally Constructed Gaussian Map:
After obtaining a new keyframe, we incrementally create
Gaussians to optimize the map. For newly observed feature
point in the image, we add a new Gaussian with the color of
that pixel, centered at the location obtained by unprojection
function π−1(·) to the pixel, an opacity of 0.5, and a unit
radius. Furthermore, the 2D geometric feature points essen-
tially represent regions of complex texture within the spatial
distribution framework. For complex textures, more Gaussians
are required to better fit the semantics. Therefore, we actively
create additional Gaussians based on the 2D feature points by
spatially sampling within the surrounding unit space to form
new Gaussians and densify the Gaussian map.
2) Rendering via Splatting:
Gaussian Splatting generates RGB images by first sorting
a given set of 3D Gaussians based on their depth from
the camera. Subsequently, the image is rendered by alpha-
compositing the 2D projections of these Gaussians with N in
pixel space, in that order. The final color C and depth D of
each pixel is determined by this process.
Cr =
X
i∈N
ciαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αi)
(12)
Similarly, we can render the depth values of the image,
Dr =
X
i∈N
diαi
i−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αi)
(13a)
where
di = (Tiµ)z
(13b)
3) Gaussian Update:
The Gaussian parameters are then updated iteratively by
gradient-based optimization through differentiably rendering
RGB, depth, and dynamic mask to minimize the following
loss with the Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithm [18]:
L = (1 −λ) |Mc · (Cr −Cgt)|1 + λ|M · (Dr −Dgt)|1
(14)
λ is a weight factor for balance color and depth of pixel and
Mc represents the repetition of the single-channel M to form
a three-channel mask suitable for C.

<!-- page 5 -->
Input
Splatam
Photo-SLAM
Photo-SLAM_Mask
DyPho-SLAM(Ours)
fr3/w/xyz
fr3/w/half
bonn/ps_track
bonn/cr3
Fig. 4.
Comparison of rendered results from state-of-the-art Gaussian Splatting SLAM methods.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
A. Experiment Setup
Implementation details: We adopt Photo-SLAM [13] as
the baseline in our experiments and run DyPho-SLAM on
a desktop PC with a 5.20GHz Intel Core i7-13700F CPU
and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060. DyPho-SLAM was fully
implemented in C++ and CUDA, making use of YOLO [16],
ORB-SLAM3 [6], 3D Gaussian splatting [9], and the LibTorch
framework. We set the parameter as follows: nf = 12, nm =
9, k = 0.9, σm = 0.2, σ0 = 0.3, λ = 0.7.
Datasets and Metric: We evaluated our approach using
two prominent dynamic datasets: the TUM RGB-D dataset
[19] and the Bonn RGB-D dataset [20], which are captured in
indoor environments with a handheld device, providing RGB
images, depth maps, and ground truth trajectories. We evaluate
camera tracking performance using the Root Mean Square
Error (RMSE) and Standard Deviation (Std.) of Absolute Tra-
jectory Error (ATE) [19]. For the evaluation of reconstruction
quality, we qualitatively demonstrated the experimental results
through novel view rendering. Additionally, we measure real-
time performance by examining the tracking time, mapping
time, and processing time per frame.
B. Evaluation of Tracking and Mapping
For a visual demonstration of localization, we compare
the trajectories obtained using our method with those from
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDY ON PRIOR-IMAGE-BASED MASK REFINED STRATEGY
AND ADAPTIVE FEATURE SELECTION METHOD ON TUM F3/W/XYZ.
Prior Image Mask
Adaptive Feature
fr3/w/xyz
fr3/w/half
✓
×
3.12
3.83
×
✓
2.76
3.54
✓
✓
1.62
2.55
Photo-SLAM on the TUM dataset, as shown in Fig. 3. To
evaluate the accuracy of camera tracking in dynamic scenes,
we compare our methods with traditional SOTA classical
SLAM methods like ORB-SLAM3 [6], DynaSLAM [7], dense
reconstruction systems like NICE-SLAM [21], ESLAM [22],
Splatam [12], Photo-SLAM [13], GS-SLAM [11] and recently
dynamic SLAM like RoDyn-SLAM [8], DGS-SLAM [14],
GassiDy [23] . As illustrated in Table I, our proposed method
attains superior ATE results compared to other dense SLAM
approaches and even outperforms SOTA Feature-SLAM in
multiple scenarios. In addition, we conducted ablation exper-
iments on the TUM dataset for our proposed method. The
specific ATE results, as shown in Table II, demonstrate the
effectiveness of our presented module.
To assess the mapping capabilities, we benchmarked our
method against open-source Gaussian Splatting-based SLAM
algorithms, notably SplaTAM [12] and Photo-SLAM [13]. To
ensure fairness, we enhanced the baseline Photo-SLAM with

<!-- page 6 -->
TABLE III
RUN-TIME COMPARISON ON TUM FR3/W/XYZ. THE BEST RESULTS
AND SECOND BEST ARE IN BOLD AND UNDERLINED, RESPECTIVELY. ×
REPRESENTS THE CORRESPONDING DATA ISN’T IN THE ORIGINAL REPORT.
Method
Tracking
Mapping
FPS
Operate Time ↓
[ms] ↓
[ms] ↓
[hz] ↑
ORB-SLAM3
52.5
×
19.2
<1 min
Dyna-SLAM3
141
×
11.7
<2 mins
NICE-SLAM
3535
3055
0.15
>30 mins
ESLAM
1002
703
0.58
>10 mins
RoDyn-SLAM
159
678
1.19
>10 mins
Splatam
3417
759
0.23
>30 mins
GS-SLAM
775
164
1.07
>10 mins
Photo-SLAM
51.5
2.5
17.53
<1 min 30s
DGS-SLAM
×
×
1.60
<5 mins
DG-SLAM
89.2
549.3
1.55
<5 mins
Ours
61.7
3.2
16.08
<1 min 30s
a raw mask specifically for this evaluation. Fig. 4 presents a
qualitative comparison of the rendered images obtained from
the reconstructed Gaussian maps. Traditional GS-based SLAM
systems often produce Gaussians for moving objects in such
settings, leading to distorted scene reconstructions. In contrast,
our proposed methods demonstrate superior performance in
generating a precise and photorealistic static map.
C. Time Analysis
We evaluated the runtime performance of various SLAM
algorithms on the TUM dataset, and the results are presented
in Table III. For dense SLAM methods, only Photo-SLAM and
our proposed DyPho-SLAM achieve frame processing rates
that satisfy the requirements for real-time reconstruction. This
demonstrates the effectiveness of our framework in address-
ing dynamic SLAM challenges while utilizing computational
resources efficiently.
V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK
This study proposes DyPho-SLAM, a real-time and robust
method to achieve localization and photorealistic mapping
in dynamic environments. A novel mask generation method,
leveraging prior image information for adaptive feature point
selection, has been proposed to address inaccurate dynamic ob-
ject removal and limited point constraints in high-fidelity map-
ping. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that DyPho-
SLAM significantly outperforms existing SOTA SLAMs for
online photorealistic mapping. However, our mapping methods
focus on reconstructing a static background, and prior-map-
based mask is still constrained by the underlying raw object
detection. In the future, we aim to develop a method of
reconstructing the motion of dynamic objects in real-time
while ensuring the static scene remains stationary.
REFERENCES
[1] Iman Abaspur Kazerouni, Luke Fitzgerald, Gerard Dooly, and Daniel
Toal, “A survey of state-of-the-art on visual slam,” Expert Systems with
Applications, vol. 205, pp. 117734, 2022.
[2] Fabio Tosi, Youmin Zhang, Ziren Gong, Erik Sandstr¨om, Stefano
Mattoccia, Martin R Oswald, and Matteo Poggi,
“How nerfs and
3d gaussian splatting are reshaping slam: a survey,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2402.13255, vol. 4, 2024.
[3] Ziheng Xu, Jianwei Niu, Qingfeng Li, Tao Ren, and Chen Chen,
“Nid-slam: Neural implicit representation-based rgb-d slam in dynamic
environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01189, 2024.
[4] Yanan Wang, Yaobin Tian, Jiawei Chen, Kun Xu, and Xilun Ding, “A
survey of visual slam in dynamic environment: the evolution from geo-
metric to semantic approaches,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation
and Measurement, 2024.
[5] Junhao Cheng, Zhi Wang, Hongyan Zhou, Li Li, and Jian Yao, “Dm-
slam: A feature-based slam system for rigid dynamic scenes,” ISPRS
International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 202, 2020.
[6] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J G´omez Rodr´ıguez, Jos´e MM
Montiel, and Juan D Tard´os, “Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source li-
brary for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1874–1890, 2021.
[7] Berta Bescos, Jos´e M F´acil, Javier Civera, and Jos´e Neira, “Dynaslam:
Tracking, mapping, and inpainting in dynamic scenes,” IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 4076–4083, 2018.
[8] Haochen Jiang, Yueming Xu, Kejie Li, Jianfeng Feng, and Li Zhang,
“Rodyn-slam: Robust dynamic dense rgb-d slam with neural radiance
fields,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.
[9] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimk¨uhler, and George
Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.,”
ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023.
[10] Siting Zhu, Guangming Wang, Dezhi Kong, and Hesheng Wang,
“3d gaussian splatting in robotics: A survey,”
arXiv preprint
arXiv:2410.12262, 2024.
[11] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dan Xu, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong Wang, and
Xuelong Li, “Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaussian splatting,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 19595–19604.
[12] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Geng-
shan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan, and Jonathon Luiten,
“Splatam: Splat track & map 3d gaussians for dense rgb-d slam,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21357–21366.
[13] Huajian Huang, Longwei Li, Hui Cheng, and Sai-Kit Yeung, “Photo-
slam: Real-time simultaneous localization and photorealistic mapping
for monocular stereo and rgb-d cameras,”
in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 21584–21593.
[14] Mangyu Kong, Jaewon Lee, Seongwon Lee, and Euntai Kim, “Dgs-
slam: Gaussian splatting slam in dynamic environment,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2411.10722, 2024.
[15] Yueming Xu, Haochen Jiang, Zhongyang Xiao, Jianfeng Feng, and
Li Zhang,
“Dg-slam: Robust dynamic gaussian splatting slam with
hybrid pose optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.08373, 2024.
[16] Yuhao Zhang, “Ngd-slam: Towards real-time slam for dynamic envi-
ronments without gpu,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07392, 2024.
[17] Ananth Ranganathan, “The levenberg-marquardt algorithm,” Tutoral on
LM algorithm, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 101–110, 2004.
[18] Nikhil Ketkar and Nikhil Ketkar, “Stochastic gradient descent,” Deep
learning with Python: A hands-on introduction, pp. 113–132, 2017.
[19] J¨urgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram Burgard, and
Daniel Cremers,
“A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam
systems,”
in 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent
robots and systems. IEEE, 2012, pp. 573–580.
[20] Emanuele Palazzolo, Jens Behley, Philipp Lottes, Philippe Giguere, and
Cyrill Stachniss, “Refusion: 3d reconstruction in dynamic environments
for rgb-d cameras exploiting residuals,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2019, pp.
7855–7862.
[21] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hujun Bao,
Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and Marc Pollefeys,
“Nice-slam:
Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam,”
in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022,
pp. 12786–12796.
[22] Mohammad Mahdi Johari, Camilla Carta, and Franc¸ois Fleuret, “Eslam:
Efficient dense slam system based on hybrid representation of signed
distance fields,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 17408–17419.
[23] Long Wen, Shixin Li, Yu Zhang, Yuhong Huang, Jianjie Lin, Fengjunjie
Pan, Zhenshan Bing, and Alois Knoll, “Gassidy: Gaussian splatting slam
in dynamic environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15476, 2024.
