# DyPho-SLAM : Real-time Photorealistic SLAM in Dynamic Environments

Yi Liu1, Keyu Fan1, Bin Lan2, Houde Liu1,\*,

1Tsinghua Shenzhen International Graduate School, Tsinghua University, Shenzhen, China 2Jianghuai Advance Technology Center, Hefei, China

Abstract—Visual SLAM algorithms have been enhanced through the exploration of Gaussian Splatting representations, particularly in generating high-fidelity dense maps. While existing methods perform reliably in static environments, they often encounter camera tracking drift and fuzzy mapping when dealing with the disturbances caused by moving objects. This paper presents DyPho-SLAM, a real-time, resource-efficient visual SLAM system designed to address the challenges of localization and photorealistic mapping in environments with dynamic objects. Specifically, the proposed system integrates prior image information to generate refined masks, effectively minimizing noise from mask misjudgment. Additionally, to enhance constraints for optimization after removing dynamic obstacles, we devise adaptive feature extraction strategies significantly improving the system’s resilience. Experiments conducted on publicly dynamic RGB-D datasets demonstrate that the proposed system achieves state-of-the-art performance in camera pose estimation and dense map reconstruction, while operating in real-time in dynamic scenes.

Index Terms—explicit map representation, dynamic SLAM, visual SLAM

## I. INTRODUCTION

Visual simultaneous localization and mapping (vSLAM), which involves determining the pose of a vision sensor and reconstructing the environment, is widely applied in the fields of robotics, augmented reality (AR), and virtual reality (VR) [1]. Moreover, compared to constructing sparse point clouds, dense reconstruction offers substantial advantages in terms of both accuracy and fidelity [2]. However, in real-world scenes that contain dynamic objects, the traditional dense SLAM algorithms could experience significant performance degradation in terms of incorrect data associations [3].

Accomplishing dense SLAM tasks in dynamic environments presents two key challenges: 1) The dynamic objects exclusion strategies are imperfect [4], leading to local errors in localization. 2) Remaining features are few in dynamic environments, resulting in the reduced constraints for pose optimization [5] and lack of density in reconstruction. To address these challenges, this paper proposes a real-time precise localization and high-fidelity mapping system in dynamic scenes. First, we propose a refined mask generation strategy based on prior image information, which comprehensively utilizes the accumulation of past image frames to avoid missing dynamic object masks in a single frame. Next, we develop a feature point selection method with compensation for sparse remaining features, which enhances constraints for optimization. Finally, we integrate mask and feature points into the explicit Gaussian Splatting mapping process, achieving high-fidelity mapping in a dynamic environment.

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->

<!-- image-->

, ,QSXW 5\*%' )UDPHV ZLWK '\QDPLF 2EMHFW  
<!-- image-->  
D 3KRWR6/\$0

<!-- image-->  
,, &RQVWUXFWHG )HDWXUH 3RLQW

<!-- image-->  
D 3KRWR6/\$0

<!-- image-->  
E 2XUV

,,, 7UDFNLQJ 	 \*DXVVLDQ 0DSSLQJ  
<!-- image-->  
D 3KRWR6/\$0

<!-- image-->  
E 2XUV  
,9 5HQGHU 1HZ 9LHZ  
Fig. 1. An example compares DyPho-SLAM with Photo-SLAM (Feature-GS) on the bonn/ps track dataset. (I) The input RGBD images contain the moving person. (II) presents a comparison of the effectiveness of the constructed feature points, while (III) demonstrates the tracking results and the constructed Gaussian. (IV) illustrates the effect of rendering a new view through Splatting.

## A. Related Work

Current research on dynamic-SLAM primarily focuses on single-frame image detection, neglecting the correlation and continuity between frames, and thus fails to achieve perfect extraction across all frames. For example, ORB-SLAM3 [6] uses re-sampling and residual optimization strategies to remove dynamic objects. Dyna-SLAM [7] employs semantic extraction to extract dynamic object masks, while Rodyn-SLAM [8] further integrates optical flow motion on this basis. The missed masks in specific frames are then applied to dense mapping methods, which can result in trajectory inaccuracies and some noise artifacts during the rendering process. Our proposed DyPho-SLAM establishes a background model based on previous images, achieving highly accurate mask generation and reducing the noise present in dynamic mapping.

<!-- image-->  
Fig. 2. Pineline of our Dypho-SLAM: the “Dynamic Process” module III-A performs RGB-D image to extract mask, followed by general mask generation and prior image refinement steps. Subsequently, the “Tracking” module III-B passes through the feature extractor, feature matcher, and pose optimization to obtain the camera pose and feature bin. Finally, the “Mapping” module III-C continuously updates the Gaussian map by optimizing the loss function.

Considering the resource consumption issue of implicit representation, 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) framework achieves rapid rendering requirements through explicit scene representations [9], enabling its rapid development in the field of dense SLAM [10]. MonoGS [11] and SplatAM [12] simultaneously optimize tracking and Gaussian parameters to accomplish SLAM tasks, while Photo-SLAM [13] initializes with feature points as hyper-primitives and addresses the speed issues in both tracking and mapping. Currently, dynamic 3DGS SLAM is still in a rapid exploratory stage. The latest dynamic 3DGS SLAM algorithms, DGS-SLAM [14] and DG-SLAM [15] fail to meet the requirements for real-time and precise localization, resulting in the phenomenon of ghosting artifacts in rendering.

## B. Contributions

This work offers the following contributions:

1) We present an explicit representation-based framework capable of achieving real-time camera tracking and highquality mapping in real-world dynamic environments.

2) We propose a high-quality mask generation strategy based on prior image information and an adaptive point selection method, resulting in accurate localization and high-fidelity reconstruction.

3) Experiments on two challenging dynamic datasets demonstrate Dypho-SLAM achieves state-of-the-art performance in camera pose estimation and dense map reconstruction, while operating in real-time.

## II. OVERVIEW OF THE FRAMEWORK

## A. Problem Statement

Given an image sequence $\mathcal { T } = \{ I _ { i } | I _ { i } = [ C _ { i } | D _ { i } ] \} _ { i = 1 } ^ { N } ( I _ { i } \in$ $\mathbb { R } ^ { H \times W \times 4 } , C _ { i } \in \mathbb { R } ^ { \hat { H } \times W \times 3 }$ 2 $\begin{array} { r } { D _ { i } \in \mathbb { R } ^ { H \times W \times 1 } ) } \end{array}$ containing dynamic objects captured at a certain frame rate by an RGB-D camera with known intrinsics $K \in \mathbb { R } ^ { 3 \times 3 }$ , our objective is to obtain their corresponding camera projection matrices $\mathcal { T } = \{ \mathbf { } T _ { i } | \mathbf { } T _ { i } = [ R _ { i } | t _ { i } ] \} _ { i = 1 } ^ { \bar { N } } ,$ , while updating Gaussian parameters $\mathcal { G } = \{ \pmb { \mu } _ { j } , \alpha _ { j } , \pmb { \Sigma } _ { j } , \pmb { c } _ { j } \} _ { j = 1 } ^ { n ( \mathcal { G } ) }$ in every frame as follows:

$$
\mathcal { T }  \mathcal { T } , \mathcal { G }\tag{1}
$$

where the camera orientation $\mathbf { R } \in S O ( 3 )$ and position $\pm \in \mathbb { R } ^ { 3 }$ together form the camera’s projection matrix $\pmb { T } \in \ S E { ( 3 ) }$ The Gaussian parameter is characterized by its spatial position $\mu _ { j }$ , opacity value $\alpha _ { j }$ , covariance matrix $\Sigma _ { j }$ , and spherical harmonics-based color coefficients $c _ { j }$ . The process of solving T and G should satisfy: 1) minimizing absolute trajectory error root mean square error. 2) optimal Gaussian rendering performance for representing the static environment. 3) minimizing the time and resources needed to complete the task.

## B. System Framework

The structure of the proposed Dypho-SLAM algorithm completes real-time localization and photorealistic mapping tasks in dynamic environments through a series of interconnected processes, as shown in Fig. 1 and Fig. 2. It primarily comprises three modules: the “Dynamic Process” module III-A, the “Tracking” module III-B, and the “Mapping” module III-C.

## III. IMPLEMENTATION

## A. Dynamic Process

1) Raw Mask Generation:

To distinguish between dynamic obstacles and the static environment, we need to obtain a mask of moving obstacles, uniformly represented as $M _ { [ * ] } ( M _ { [ * ] } \ \in \ \mathbb { R } ^ { H \times W \times \tilde { 1 } } )$ , where 0 and 1 denote the presence and absence of a moving obstacle at a pixel, respectively. We obtained the raw mask by overlaying two mask generation methods as follows:

• Segment Mask: The method of obtaining a mask through semantic segmentation provides precise segmentation for image semantic understanding as follows:

$$
f _ { \theta } : \{ I _ { i } \} _ { i = 1 } ^ { N }  \{ M _ { s e g } \} _ { i = 1 } ^ { N }\tag{2}
$$

where $f _ { \theta }$ is implemented as a YOLO network [16] with trainable parameters θ trained on large-scale datasets.

• Motion Mask: To mitigate the impact of out-ofdistribution moving objects on segment extraction, we introduce the optical flow method. Specifically, we solve for the optical flow vectors using the optical flow constraint equation as follows:

$$
\frac { \partial L } { \partial x } u + \frac { \partial L } { \partial y } v + \frac { \partial L } { \partial t } = 0\tag{3}
$$

where $L ( x , y , i )$ is the i-th image’s brightness function, u and v are the components of optical flow vector. After determining optical flow, we apply thresholds T to identify motion masks on larger magnitudes, as follows:

$$
M _ { F l o w } ( x , y ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { c c } { 0 } & { | | u ( x , y ) + v ( x , y ) | | ^ { 2 } > T } \\ { 1 } & { \mathrm { o t h e r w i s e } } \end{array} \right.\tag{4}
$$

## 2) Optimized Mask via Prior Image Information:

The semantic and motion methods only focus on a single image frame, ignoring the continuity between frames, which can lead to mask misjudgments and result in significant noise and ghosting in map construction. Here, we propose a method for removing dynamic obstacles based on a prior static background image model, which is specifically represented as follows:

$$
\begin{array} { r } { B _ { i } = ( 1 - \tau - \rho ) B _ { i - 1 } + \tau R _ { d } ( \mathcal { G } , \pmb { T } _ { i - 1 } \delta \pmb { T } ) } \\ { + \rho \cdot \pmb { D } _ { i } ( \mathbf { 1 } - M _ { F l o w } \bigoplus M _ { S e g m e n t } ) } \end{array}\tag{5}
$$

where $B _ { i } ( B _ { i } \in \mathbb { R } ^ { H \times W \times 1 } )$ represents the depth static image model of the i-th image and $B _ { 1 }$ is initialized by removing the dynamic objects from the first depth image frame. τ and ρ are hyperparameters, representing the degree of belief in past renderings and the degree of trust in the segment mask and flow motion mask, respectively. L is an assign process, which can be simply processed through OR operation. $R _ { d } ( \cdot )$ is a Gaussian rendering process to return depth image through a Gaussian map and camera pose detailed as III- $\mathbf { \nabla } \cdot \mathbf { C } 2 ,$ , and ${ \delta } \pmb { T }$ is determined by a constant velocity camera model to estimate a relative pose value as follows:

$$
\delta { \pmb T } = { \pmb T } _ { i - 1 } { \pmb T } _ { i - 2 } ^ { - 1 }\tag{6}
$$

Here, we obtain the final mask result by considering a point as static if its neighboring depth value is similar to the value in the static map model. Specifically:

$$
M ( x , y ) = \left\{ \begin{array} { l l } { 1 } & { n ( | B _ { i , ( x , y ) } - D _ { i , ( N ( x , y ) ) } | < \sigma _ { m } ) > n _ { m } } \\ { 0 } & { \mathrm { o t h e r w i s e } } \end{array} \right.\tag{7}
$$

where $N ( \cdot )$ returns the neighbors of $( x , y ) . \ \sigma _ { m }$ measures the depth difference threshold. The function $n ( \cdot )$ returns the count of neighbors that satisfy the condition within (·), and $n _ { m }$ represents the threshold for this count.

## B. Localization Algorithm

## 1) Feature Extract:

After obtaining the mask, we excluded the areas containing dynamic obstacles. However, removing these dynamic obstacles resulted in a decrease in feature points, which reduced the constraints within the SLAM optimization problem, making it underdetermined and degenerate. Consequently, localization performance decreased compared to static environments. To address the issue of fewer feature points in dynamic environments, we propose a dynamic feature sampling method based on a generated mask on the Gaussian pyramid. A Gaussian pyramid represents an image at multiple scales, capturing varying levels of detail through a series of Gaussian smoothing and downsampling operations applied iteratively to the original image. When a pixel satisfies the following criteria, we define it as a relaxed feature points specific to dynamic masking:

$$
n ( | G _ { i , ( x , y ) } - G _ { i , ( N ( x , y ) ) } | < \sigma _ { d y } ) > n _ { f }\tag{8}
$$

where $G$ represents the grayscale image of the i-th frame image at pixel (x, y), nf is a number value above which a point can be considered as a feature point, and $\sigma _ { d y }$ is a dynamic threshold used to adjust the number of feature points in dynamic environments, which is expressed as:

$$
\sigma _ { d y } = \sigma _ { 0 } ( 1 - k \frac { \sum M } { H \times W } )\tag{9}
$$

where $\sigma _ { 0 }$ represents the initial gray difference threshold, and k is a parameter used to adjust the proportion of additional feature points. This method ensures a stable number of feature points as a bin after applying the mask, thereby achieving a balance between processing speed and localization accuracy.

## 2) Pose Optimization:

In the localization process, we use a motion-only bundle adjustment to minimize the reprojection error between matched 2D geometric keypoint of the frame and 3D point, which we are trying to optimize with LM algorithm [17] is

$$
\{ R _ { i } , t _ { i } \} = \arg \operatorname* { m i n } _ { { \bf R } , { \bf t } } \sum _ { j \in \mathcal { M } } \rho _ { h } ( { \bf e } _ { i , j } ^ { T } \Omega _ { i , j } ^ { - 1 } { \bf e } _ { i , j } )\tag{10a}
$$

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { w h e r e } & { { } \mathbf { e } _ { i , j } = \mathbf { P } _ { I } - \pi _ { i } ( \mathbf { T } _ { i } , \mathbf { P } _ { w , j } ) } \end{array}\tag{10b}
$$

The error term $\mathbf { e } _ { i , j }$ is for the observation of a map point j in i-th image which is optimized by minimizing robust Huber cost function $\rho _ { h } ( \cdot ) . \ \Omega _ { i , j } \ = \ \omega _ { i , j } ^ { 2 } { \bf I _ { 2 X 2 } }$ is the scaleassociated covariance matrix of the keypoint. $P _ { w }$ represents the coordinates in the world coordinate system, and $P _ { I }$ represents the matched pixel position in the camera coordinate system. $\pi ( \cdot )$ is the 3D-to-2D projection function as follows

$$
\pi _ { i } ( { \bf T } _ { i } , { \bf P } _ { w , j } ) = K D _ { i , { \bf P _ { w } } } ^ { - 1 } ( R { \bf P } _ { w , j } + t )\tag{11}
$$

Afterwards, loop closure detection is performed at the keyframe to further optimize the pose.

<!-- image-->  
(a) fr3/w/xyz

<!-- image-->  
(b) fr3/w/half

<!-- image-->  
(c) fr3/w/static

<!-- image-->  
(b) fr3/s/half  
Fig. 3. Camera trajectories estimated by Photo-SLAM and ours in the TUM dataset sequences, and the differences from ground truth

TABLE I  
CAMERA TRACKING RESULTS ON DYNAMIC SCENES FROM THE TUM RGB-D DATASET. THE UNITS FOR $\mathrm { A T E } ( \downarrow )$ AND STD.(↓) ARE IN CM. THE BEST RESULTS AMONG ALL DOMAINS ARE HIGHLIGHTED IN BOLD. × REPRESENTS THAT THE CORRESPONDING DATA IS NOT IN THE ORIGINAL REPORT.
<table><tr><td>Method</td><td>Dense</td><td colspan="2">fr3/w/xyz</td><td colspan="2">fr3/w/half</td><td colspan="2">fr3/w/static</td><td colspan="2">fr3/s/half</td><td colspan="2">Avg.</td></tr><tr><td>Feature-based SLAM methods</td><td></td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td></tr><tr><td>ORB-SLAM3</td><td></td><td>28.1</td><td>12.2</td><td>0.31</td><td>9.0</td><td>2.0</td><td>1.1</td><td>2.6</td><td>1.6</td><td>15.8</td><td>6</td></tr><tr><td>Dyna-SLAM</td><td></td><td>1.7</td><td>×</td><td>2.6</td><td>×</td><td>0.7</td><td>×</td><td>2.8</td><td>×</td><td>2</td><td>×</td></tr><tr><td>NeRF-based SLAM methods</td><td></td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td></tr><tr><td>NICE-SLAM</td><td></td><td>113.8</td><td>48.9</td><td>×</td><td>×</td><td>137.3</td><td>21.7</td><td>93.3</td><td>35.3</td><td>114.8</td><td>33.3</td></tr><tr><td>ESLAM</td><td></td><td>45.7</td><td>28.5</td><td>60.8</td><td>27.9</td><td>93.6</td><td>20.7</td><td>3.6</td><td>1.6</td><td>34.5</td><td>13.5</td></tr><tr><td>RoDyn-SLAM</td><td>&gt;&gt;&gt;</td><td>8.3</td><td>5.5</td><td>5.6</td><td>2.8</td><td>1.7</td><td>0.9</td><td>4.4</td><td>2.2</td><td>4.1</td><td>2.3</td></tr><tr><td>3DGS-based SLAM methods</td><td></td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td></tr><tr><td>Splatam</td><td></td><td>136.6</td><td>33.7</td><td>185.4</td><td>67.6</td><td>78.3</td><td>23.5</td><td>14.1</td><td>7.0</td><td>135.5</td><td>109.6</td></tr><tr><td>GSS-SLAM</td><td>&gt;&gt;&gt;&gt;</td><td>37.2</td><td>9.9</td><td>60.0</td><td>20.7</td><td>8.4</td><td>4.1</td><td>7.4</td><td>5.4</td><td>28.5</td><td>10.0</td></tr><tr><td>GassiDy</td><td></td><td>3.5</td><td>1.6</td><td>3.7</td><td>1.9</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.3</td><td>2.4</td><td>1.4</td><td>2.6</td><td>1.3</td></tr><tr><td>DGS-SLAM</td><td></td><td>4.1</td><td>2.2</td><td>5.5</td><td>2.8</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.2</td><td>4.1</td><td>1.6</td><td>3.0</td><td>1.5</td></tr><tr><td>Feature-3DGS SLAM methods</td><td></td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td><td>ATE</td><td>Std.</td></tr><tr><td>Photo-SLAM</td><td>✓</td><td>88.3</td><td>48.9</td><td>33.5</td><td>9.3</td><td>9.4</td><td>6.3</td><td>3.2</td><td>1.4</td><td>33.6</td><td>16.3</td></tr><tr><td>Ours</td><td>✓</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.8</td><td>2.6</td><td>1.3</td><td>0.6</td><td>0.3</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.7</td><td>1.6</td><td>0.7</td></tr></table>

## C. Mapping Algorithm

We employ the Gaussian map representation, which enables the projection of 3D Gaussian volumes onto a 2D-pixel plane through rasterization rendering, thereby generating images from various viewpoints. The core task in this section is to maintain the Gaussian parameters $\mathcal { G } = \{ \pmb { \mu } _ { j } , \alpha _ { j } , \pmb { \Sigma } _ { j } , \pmb { c } _ { j } \} _ { j = 1 } ^ { n ( \mathcal { G } ) }$

## 1) Incrementally Constructed Gaussian Map:

After obtaining a new keyframe, we incrementally create Gaussians to optimize the map. For newly observed feature point in the image, we add a new Gaussian with the color of that pixel, centered at the location obtained by unprojection function $\pi ^ { - 1 } ( \cdot )$ to the pixel, an opacity of 0.5, and a unit radius. Furthermore, the 2D geometric feature points essentially represent regions of complex texture within the spatial distribution framework. For complex textures, more Gaussians are required to better fit the semantics. Therefore, we actively create additional Gaussians based on the 2D feature points by spatially sampling within the surrounding unit space to form new Gaussians and densify the Gaussian map.

## 2) Rendering via Splatting:

Gaussian Splatting generates RGB images by first sorting a given set of 3D Gaussians based on their depth from the camera. Subsequently, the image is rendered by alphacompositing the 2D projections of these Gaussians with N in pixel space, in that order. The final color C and depth D of each pixel is determined by this process.

$$
C _ { r } = \sum _ { i \in N } \mathbf { c } _ { i } \alpha _ { i } \prod _ { j = 1 } ^ { i - 1 } ( 1 - \alpha _ { i } )\tag{12}
$$

Similarly, we can render the depth values of the image,

$$
D _ { r } = \sum _ { i \in N } \mathbf { d } _ { i } \alpha _ { i } \prod _ { j = 1 } ^ { i - 1 } ( 1 - \alpha _ { i } )\tag{13a}
$$

$$
\begin{array} { r l } { w h e r e } & { { } \mathbf { d } _ { i } = ( T _ { i } \pmb { \mu } ) _ { z } } \end{array}\tag{13b}
$$

## 3) Gaussian Update:

The Gaussian parameters are then updated iteratively by gradient-based optimization through differentiably rendering RGB, depth, and dynamic mask to minimize the following loss with the Stochastic Gradient Descent algorithm [18]:

$$
\mathcal { L } = ( 1 - \lambda ) \left| M _ { c } \cdot ( \boldsymbol { C } _ { r } - \boldsymbol { C } _ { g t } ) \right| _ { 1 } + \lambda | M \cdot ( \boldsymbol { D } _ { r } - \boldsymbol { D } _ { g t } ) | _ { 1 }\tag{14}
$$

λ is a weight factor for balance color and depth of pixel and $M _ { c }$ represents the repetition of the single-channel M to form a three-channel mask suitable for C.

Input  
Splatam  
Photo-SLAM  
Photo-SLAM_Mask  
DyPho-SLAM(Ours)  
<!-- image-->  
Fig. 4. Comparison of rendered results from state-of-the-art Gaussian Splatting SLAM methods.

## IV. EXPERIMENTS

## A. Experiment Setup

Implementation details: We adopt Photo-SLAM [13] as the baseline in our experiments and run DyPho-SLAM on a desktop PC with a 5.20GHz Intel Core i7-13700F CPU and NVIDIA GeForce RTX 3060. DyPho-SLAM was fully implemented in C++ and CUDA, making use of YOLO [16], ORB-SLAM3 [6], 3D Gaussian splatting [9], and the LibTorch framework. We set the parameter as follows: $n _ { f } = 1 2 , n _ { m } =$ $9 , k = 0 . 9 , \sigma _ { m } = 0 . 2 , \sigma _ { 0 } = 0 . 3 , \lambda = 0 . 7 .$

Datasets and Metric: We evaluated our approach using two prominent dynamic datasets: the TUM RGB-D dataset [19] and the Bonn RGB-D dataset [20], which are captured in indoor environments with a handheld device, providing RGB images, depth maps, and ground truth trajectories. We evaluate camera tracking performance using the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) and Standard Deviation (Std.) of Absolute Trajectory Error (ATE) [19]. For the evaluation of reconstruction quality, we qualitatively demonstrated the experimental results through novel view rendering. Additionally, we measure realtime performance by examining the tracking time, mapping time, and processing time per frame.

## B. Evaluation of Tracking and Mapping

For a visual demonstration of localization, we compare the trajectories obtained using our method with those from

TABLE II  
ABLATION STUDY ON PRIOR-IMAGE-BASED MASK REFINED STRATEGY AND ADAPTIVE FEATURE SELECTION METHOD ON TUM F3/W/XYZ.
<table><tr><td>Prior Image Mask</td><td>Adaptive Feature</td><td>fr3/w/xyz</td><td>fr3/w/half</td></tr><tr><td>✓</td><td>×&gt;</td><td>3.12</td><td>3.83</td></tr><tr><td>×</td><td></td><td>2.76</td><td>3.54</td></tr><tr><td>✓</td><td>✓</td><td>1.62</td><td>2.55</td></tr></table>

Photo-SLAM on the TUM dataset, as shown in Fig. 3. To evaluate the accuracy of camera tracking in dynamic scenes, we compare our methods with traditional SOTA classical SLAM methods like ORB-SLAM3 [6], DynaSLAM [7], dense reconstruction systems like NICE-SLAM [21], ESLAM [22], Splatam [12], Photo-SLAM [13], GS-SLAM [11] and recently dynamic SLAM like RoDyn-SLAM [8], DGS-SLAM [14], GassiDy [23] . As illustrated in Table I, our proposed method attains superior ATE results compared to other dense SLAM approaches and even outperforms SOTA Feature-SLAM in multiple scenarios. In addition, we conducted ablation experiments on the TUM dataset for our proposed method. The specific ATE results, as shown in Table II, demonstrate the effectiveness of our presented module.

To assess the mapping capabilities, we benchmarked our method against open-source Gaussian Splatting-based SLAM algorithms, notably SplaTAM [12] and Photo-SLAM [13]. To ensure fairness, we enhanced the baseline Photo-SLAM with a raw mask specifically for this evaluation. Fig. 4 presents a qualitative comparison of the rendered images obtained from the reconstructed Gaussian maps. Traditional GS-based SLAM systems often produce Gaussians for moving objects in such settings, leading to distorted scene reconstructions. In contrast, our proposed methods demonstrate superior performance in generating a precise and photorealistic static map.

TABLE III  
RUN-TIME COMPARISON ON TUM FR3/W/XYZ. THE BEST RESULTSAND SECOND BEST ARE IN BOLD AND UNDERLINED, RESPECTIVELY. ×REPRESENTS THE CORRESPONDING DATA ISN’T IN THE ORIGINAL REPORT.
<table><tr><td>Method</td><td>Tracking [ms] ↓</td><td>Mapping [ms] ↓</td><td>FPS [hz] ↑</td><td>Operate Time ↓</td></tr><tr><td>ORB-SLAM3</td><td>52.5</td><td>×</td><td>19.2</td><td>&lt;1 min</td></tr><tr><td>Dyna-SLAM3</td><td>141</td><td>×</td><td>11.7</td><td>&lt;2 mins</td></tr><tr><td>NICE-SLAM</td><td>3535</td><td>3055</td><td>0.15</td><td>&gt;30 mins</td></tr><tr><td>ESLAM</td><td>1002</td><td>703</td><td>0.58</td><td>&gt;10 mins</td></tr><tr><td>RoDyn-SLAM</td><td>159</td><td>678</td><td>1.19</td><td>&gt;10 mins</td></tr><tr><td>Splatam</td><td>3417</td><td>759</td><td>0.23</td><td>&gt;30 mins</td></tr><tr><td>GS-SLAM</td><td>775</td><td>164</td><td>1.07</td><td>&gt;10 mins</td></tr><tr><td>Photo-SLAM</td><td>51.5</td><td>2.5</td><td>17.53</td><td>≤1 min 30s</td></tr><tr><td>DGS-SLAM</td><td>×</td><td>×</td><td>1.60</td><td>&lt;5 mins</td></tr><tr><td>DG-SLAM</td><td>89.2</td><td>549.3</td><td>1.55</td><td>&lt;5 mins</td></tr><tr><td>Ours</td><td>61.7</td><td>3.2</td><td>16.08</td><td>≤1 min 30s</td></tr></table>

## C. Time Analysis

We evaluated the runtime performance of various SLAM algorithms on the TUM dataset, and the results are presented in Table III. For dense SLAM methods, only Photo-SLAM and our proposed DyPho-SLAM achieve frame processing rates that satisfy the requirements for real-time reconstruction. This demonstrates the effectiveness of our framework in addressing dynamic SLAM challenges while utilizing computational resources efficiently.

## V. CONCLUSION AND FUTURE WORK

This study proposes DyPho-SLAM, a real-time and robust method to achieve localization and photorealistic mapping in dynamic environments. A novel mask generation method, leveraging prior image information for adaptive feature point selection, has been proposed to address inaccurate dynamic object removal and limited point constraints in high-fidelity mapping. Extensive experiments have demonstrated that DyPho-SLAM significantly outperforms existing SOTA SLAMs for online photorealistic mapping. However, our mapping methods focus on reconstructing a static background, and prior-mapbased mask is still constrained by the underlying raw object detection. In the future, we aim to develop a method of reconstructing the motion of dynamic objects in real-time while ensuring the static scene remains stationary.

## REFERENCES

[1] Iman Abaspur Kazerouni, Luke Fitzgerald, Gerard Dooly, and Daniel Toal, “A survey of state-of-the-art on visual slam,” Expert Systems with Applications, vol. 205, pp. 117734, 2022.

[2] Fabio Tosi, Youmin Zhang, Ziren Gong, Erik Sandstrom, Stefano ¨ Mattoccia, Martin R Oswald, and Matteo Poggi, “How nerfs and 3d gaussian splatting are reshaping slam: a survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2402.13255, vol. 4, 2024.

[3] Ziheng Xu, Jianwei Niu, Qingfeng Li, Tao Ren, and Chen Chen, “Nid-slam: Neural implicit representation-based rgb-d slam in dynamic environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01189, 2024.

[4] Yanan Wang, Yaobin Tian, Jiawei Chen, Kun Xu, and Xilun Ding, “A survey of visual slam in dynamic environment: the evolution from geometric to semantic approaches,” IEEE Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 2024.

[5] Junhao Cheng, Zhi Wang, Hongyan Zhou, Li Li, and Jian Yao, “Dmslam: A feature-based slam system for rigid dynamic scenes,” ISPRS International Journal of Geo-Information, vol. 9, no. 4, pp. 202, 2020.

[6] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J Gomez Rodr ´ ´ıguez, Jose MM ´ Montiel, and Juan D Tardos, “Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source li- ´ brary for visual, visual–inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37, no. 6, pp. 1874–1890, 2021.

[7] Berta Bescos, Jose M F ´ acil, Javier Civera, and Jos ´ e Neira, “Dynaslam: ´ Tracking, mapping, and inpainting in dynamic scenes,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 4076–4083, 2018.

[8] Haochen Jiang, Yueming Xu, Kejie Li, Jianfeng Feng, and Li Zhang, “Rodyn-slam: Robust dynamic dense rgb-d slam with neural radiance fields,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024.

[9] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkuhler, and George ¨ Drettakis, “3d gaussian splatting for real-time radiance field rendering.,” ACM Trans. Graph., vol. 42, no. 4, pp. 139–1, 2023.

[10] Siting Zhu, Guangming Wang, Dezhi Kong, and Hesheng Wang, “3d gaussian splatting in robotics: A survey,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2410.12262, 2024.

[11] Chi Yan, Delin Qu, Dan Xu, Bin Zhao, Zhigang Wang, Dong Wang, and Xuelong Li, “Gs-slam: Dense visual slam with 3d gaussian splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 19595–19604.

[12] Nikhil Keetha, Jay Karhade, Krishna Murthy Jatavallabhula, Gengshan Yang, Sebastian Scherer, Deva Ramanan, and Jonathon Luiten, “Splatam: Splat track & map 3d gaussians for dense rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21357–21366.

[13] Huajian Huang, Longwei Li, Hui Cheng, and Sai-Kit Yeung, “Photoslam: Real-time simultaneous localization and photorealistic mapping for monocular stereo and rgb-d cameras,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21584–21593.

[14] Mangyu Kong, Jaewon Lee, Seongwon Lee, and Euntai Kim, “Dgsslam: Gaussian splatting slam in dynamic environment,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.10722, 2024.

[15] Yueming Xu, Haochen Jiang, Zhongyang Xiao, Jianfeng Feng, and Li Zhang, “Dg-slam: Robust dynamic gaussian splatting slam with hybrid pose optimization,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.08373, 2024.

[16] Yuhao Zhang, “Ngd-slam: Towards real-time slam for dynamic environments without gpu,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2405.07392, 2024.

[17] Ananth Ranganathan, “The levenberg-marquardt algorithm,” Tutoral on LM algorithm, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. 101–110, 2004.

[18] Nikhil Ketkar and Nikhil Ketkar, “Stochastic gradient descent,” Deep learning with Python: A hands-on introduction, pp. 113–132, 2017.

[19] Jurgen Sturm, Nikolas Engelhard, Felix Endres, Wolfram Burgard, and ¨ Daniel Cremers, “A benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems,” in 2012 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and systems. IEEE, 2012, pp. 573–580.

[20] Emanuele Palazzolo, Jens Behley, Philipp Lottes, Philippe Giguere, and Cyrill Stachniss, “Refusion: 3d reconstruction in dynamic environments for rgb-d cameras exploiting residuals,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, 2019, pp. 7855–7862.

[21] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Weiwei Xu, Hujun Bao, Zhaopeng Cui, Martin R Oswald, and Marc Pollefeys, “Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 12786–12796.

[22] Mohammad Mahdi Johari, Camilla Carta, and Franc¸ois Fleuret, “Eslam: Efficient dense slam system based on hybrid representation of signed distance fields,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 17408–17419.

[23] Long Wen, Shixin Li, Yu Zhang, Yuhong Huang, Jianjie Lin, Fengjunjie Pan, Zhenshan Bing, and Alois Knoll, “Gassidy: Gaussian splatting slam in dynamic environments,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2411.15476, 2024.