<!-- page 1 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
1
SPORTS: Simultaneous Panoptic Odometry,
Rendering, Tracking and Segmentation for Urban
Scenes Understanding
Zhiliu Yang, Member, IEEE, Jinyu Dai, Student Member, IEEE, Jianyuan Zhang, Student Member, IEEE,
Zhu Yang, Member, IEEE
Abstract—The scene perception, understanding, and simula-
tion are fundamental techniques for embodied-AI agents, while
existing solutions are still prone to segmentation deficiency,
dynamic objects’ interference, sensor data sparsity, and view-
limitation problems. This paper proposes a novel framework,
named SPORTS, for holistic scene understanding via tightly in-
tegrating Video Panoptic Segmentation (VPS), Visual Odometry
(VO), and Scene Rendering (SR) tasks into an iterative and
unified perspective. Firstly, VPS designs an adaptive attention-
based geometric fusion mechanism to align cross-frame features
via enrolling the pose, depth, and optical flow modality, which
automatically adjust feature maps for different decoding stages.
And a post-matching strategy is integrated to improve identities
tracking. In VO, panoptic segmentation results from VPS are
combined with the optical flow map to improve the confidence
estimation of dynamic objects, which enhances the accuracy of
the camera pose estimation and completeness of the depth map
generation via the learning-based paradigm. Furthermore, the
point-based rendering of SR is beneficial from VO, transforming
sparse point clouds into neural fields to synthesize high-fidelity
RGB views and twin panoptic views. Extensive experiments
on three public datasets demonstrate that our attention-based
feature fusion outperforms most existing state-of-the-art methods
on the odometry, tracking, segmentation, and novel view synthesis
tasks.
Index Terms—Panoptic Segmentation, Visual Localization,
Multi-modal Fusion, Novel View Synthesis, Multi-channels At-
tention.
I. INTRODUCTION
W
ITH the foreseeable future of the ubiquitous deploy-
ment of embodied-AI agents, such as self-driving vehi-
cles [1]–[4], quadruped robots [5], [6] or humanoid robots [7],
This work was supported in part by Yunnan Science Foundation of
Yunnan Provincial Department of Science and Technology, China under Grant
202301AU070200, and in part by the Program of Yunnan Key Laboratory of
Intelligent Systems and Computing under Grant 202405AV340009.
Zhiliu Yang, Jinyu Dai, and Jianyuan Zhang are with the School of
Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan
650500, China.
Zhu Yang is with the School of Information and Electronics, Beijing
Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China.
Zhiliu Yang is also with the Yunnan Key Laboratory of Intelligent Systems
and Computing, Yunnan University, Kunming, Yunnan 650500, China.
(Corresponding authors: Zhiliu Yang; Zhu Yang.)
This manuscript is the accepted version of IEEE Transactions on Multi-
media. © 2025 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission
from IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media,
including reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional
purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers
or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in other works.
a holistic urban scene understanding ability is more and more
crucial for agents to physically fulfill tasks like perception [8],
[9], localization [10], and collision avoidance [1]. Besides, the
holistic scene understanding can be exploited to create a digital
twin of the urban environment to mitigate the reality gap, it
acts as a simulation platform for agents to learn and verify the
unexpected corner cases, to enhance the safety of autonomous
driving at a lower cost [11]–[13]. Unfortunately, precisely
perceiving and modeling urban scenes are challenging due to
various object sizes, complicated geometry details, and varying
road conditions etc. [1], [3], [4], and the scene is usually
depicted via limited views and sparse data [12].
Existing methods such as [14]–[16] have started to tackle
the information silos problem of holistic scene understanding.
They leverage mutual benefits of different modalities, such as
optical flow, depth and semantics, to combine the different
tasks of scene understanding, such as visual odometry (VO),
video panoptic segmentation (VPS), [17]–[20], into a unified
framework. While the VO and VPS performances of those
methods need to be further improved to support real-world
applications.
Dynamic objects can not be negligible in the real-world ap-
plications. Some existing dynamic Simultaneous Localization
and Mapping (SLAM) systems [21], [22] propose to directly
filter out potential dynamic objects, such as pedestrians or
vehicles by semantic categories, but they overlook that sta-
tionary movable objects, like parked vehicles, also provide
useful information for localization and tracking. Additionally,
VPS frameworks [23]–[27] focus on tracking individual in-
stances in the dynamic scene without explicitly distinguishing
whether objects are moving or stationary, but their tracking
performance are still limited by the straight-forward modeling.
In contrast, PVO [28] proposes to integrate the VPS module
with the VO module by combining optical flow and semantic
segmentation results to predict the objects’ movement, this
integration realizes a more comprehensive scene modeling.
However, the feature fusion of the PVO framework does not
adequately consider the feature from adjacent frames and it
directly adopts a rudimentary decoding network.
Furthermore, the sparse point clouds generated in urban
scenarios result in a large number of holes and incomplete
geometry shapes [11], [13], which is unable to provide the
detailed and high-fidelity scenes that required by simulation
0000–0000/00$00.00 © 2025 IEEE
arXiv:2510.12749v1  [cs.CV]  14 Oct 2025

<!-- page 2 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
2
Fig. 1: The Overview of Our SPORTS Framework. The framework solely receives monocular video as input, iteratively determines the temporal panoptic
segmentation result, camera’s poses and sparse point cloud maps, finally generates the photo-realistic and panoptic scene rendering result.
environments of the autonomous driving [12]. Investigating
the method to leverage Neural Radiance Fields (NeRFs) tech-
niques for novel views synthesis of urban scenes is a promising
direction to be explored.
In this paper, we propose a novel framework, named
SPORTS, to achieve the comprehensive scene understanding,
which tightly integrates video panoptic segmentation (VPS),
visual odometry (VO), and scene rendering (SR) tasks through
a unified perspective, the general diagram is shown in Fig. 1.
In the VPS module, we employ a temporal kernel-based model
as the prototype baseline, which can be replaced by other
off-the-shelf video segmentation models. Then, we introduce
an attention-based adaptive geometry fusion mechanism that
aligns multi-resolution features of the current frame with those
of adjacent frames by utilizing poses, depths, and optical flows
generated from VO. The aligning process can focus on key
features in the fused feature maps, and automatically adjust
the feature maps at different decoding stages. And we plug in
a novel post-matching strategy for improving video instance
tracking. In VO, we obtain optical flow masks and dynamic
masks by enrolling the panoptic segmentation results from
VPS, which enhances the accuracy of pose estimation and
the completeness of depth measurement. Lastly, the highly-
precise pose estimation guarantee our point-based SR module
to transform sparse point clouds into neural fields, which
synthesizes the high-fidelity RGB images, and their corre-
sponding panoptic-annotated views. Extensive experimental
evaluations are conducted to validate the feasibility of this
novel paradigm of holistic scene understanding and to demon-
strate that SPORTS framework outperforms other existing
scene understanding methods.
Our contributions are summarized as:
• We propose the first framework, named SPORTS, to
unify visual odometry, rendering, objects tracking, and
panoptic segmentation tasks to mutually understand and
synthesize the urban street scenes. Our source code is
publicly available1.
• We propose an attention-based geometric fusion mecha-
nism and a post-matching strategy for video panoptic seg-
mentation, which improves the segmentation and tracking
quality by 3.07 % when compared to the counterparts.
• We propose a two-stage panoptic-refined flow-aware
depth propagation module to enhance learning-based vi-
1https://github.com/Fireworker20th/SPORTS
sual odometry, which is beneficial to render more high-
fidelity views than other methods.
• We exploit the foundation model to create more eval-
uation datasets than existing methods, which validates
the generalization ability of SPORTS for diverse urban
environments.
II. RELATED WORK
A. Video Panoptic Segmentation
Video panoptic segmentation (VPS) requires generating
instance tracking IDs within the video and integrating instance
segmentation with semantic segmentation to produce panoptic
segmentation result. VPSNet [23] pioneered this novel task
and introduced Video Panoptic Quality (VPQ) as an evaluation
metric, which utilizes task-specific prediction heads from
instance segmentation, semantic segmentation, and tracking,
jointly trained to obtain panoptic video results.
VIP-DeepLab [24] proposes a depth-aware VPS network by
incorporating additional depth information, which is the first
to combine geometric information with panoptic segmentation.
HybridTracker [25] introduces optical flow to track instances
based on feature space. PVO [28] combines geometric infor-
mation with panoptic segmentation by introducing an adaptive
geometric information fusion module. It enhances segmenta-
tion consistency by using optical flow predictions to match
instances. Slot-VPS [26] is the first end-to-end framework that
uses a unified representation called panoptic slot to encode all
panoptic entities in a video. It retrieves and encodes coherent
spatial-temporal object information into the panoptic slots
through a video panoptic retriever. Video K-Net [27] learns
to simultaneously segment and track “things” and “stuff” in a
video through simple kernel-based appearance modeling and
cross-temporal kernel interaction, Quasi-Dense [29], to extract
tracking embeddings as tracking heads. We observed that
existing methods have not fully utilized multiple geometric
information. The current VPS methods, when incorporating
geometric information, merely use simple convolutions to re-
duce the dimensionality of the feature map and select relevant
features from associated frames. They ignored the local cross-
channel correlations.
In recent years, numerous studies [30] on visual tasks
have introduced attention mechanisms, which have evolved
into a crucial component of neural networks. In the field of
image segmentation, many studies [31], [32] utilized channel
attention mechanisms [30], [33], [34] to optimize networks

<!-- page 3 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
3
and demonstrated their effectiveness. It is evident that channel
attention mechanisms can effectively relate context and fuse
feature information, making them a promising direction for
VPS tasks that require cross-frame integration.
B. Visual SLAM
Visual SLAM is an active field in both industry and
academia, especially in the past decade. Existing SLAM
systems can be broadly categorized into two types: geometric-
based methods [10], [35]–[37] and learning-based methods,
such as CNN-SLAM [38], and Luo et al. ’s approach
[39] which integrates predicted depth results with monocular
SLAM, ESP-VO [40] which predicts poses directly from video
sequences in an end-to-end manner, and Wang et al. ’s method
[41] uses semantic segmentation to estimate drivable areas to
reduce VO drift.
Considering
above
supervised-learning
methods
have
demonstrated
promising
performance,
more
and
more
unsupervised-learning methods are being explored for visual
odometry (VO). TartanVO [42] proposed the first learning-
based visual odometry model, featuring a scale loss func-
tion and incorporating camera intrinsic parameters into the
model, demonstrating reliable performance. DROID-SLAM
[43] utilized the optical flow to define geometric residuals
in its optimization procedures. It recursively updates camera
poses and pixel-level depths through dense bundle adjustment
layers. PVO [28] introduced a panoptic update module in
the camera pose estimation, to reduce the interference from
dynamic objects. Depth, optical flow, and semantic features are
incorporated into unsupervised learning approaches for VO,
while a more efficient and robust fusion strategy is open to be
explored.
There are also several new trends for the visual SLAM
frameworks, such as the semantic mapping with the holistic
scene understanding [18], [19], and implicit mapping [44] for
high-fidelity visual maps. TUPPer-map [17] employs a tem-
poral panoptic module for urban scene reconstruction. HUGS
[20] conducts a joint optimization of geometry, appearance,
semantics, and motion to achieve the holistic understanding
of urban scenes. Xu et al. [45] further unify interactive,
referring, and open-vocabulary semantic segmentation tasks
with the panoptic segmentation task. Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [46] have shown decent results in the high-fidelity
rendering and the novel view synthesis. DVN-SLAM [47]
leverages an attention-based module to fuse implicit features
from local discrete planes and the global continuous represen-
tation. And methods, such as SNI-SLAM [48], DDN-SLAM
[49], NIS-SLAM [50], propose to integrate neural implicit
representations into the semantic mapping frameworks. Al-
though those methods are able to generate the smooth surface
reconstruction, they are prone to the localization precision,
and are challenging to accommodate the visual odometry
requirements, which hinders the deployment of those methods
in the large-scale physical urban scenarios.
C. NeRF-based Large Scene Reconstruction
Traditional large-scale scenes reconstruction and view ren-
dering rely on Structure-from-Motion (SfM) [51]–[54] and
Multi-View Stereo (MVS) [55]–[57]. Neural Radiance Fields
(NeRFs) [46] has been naturally extended to the mapping tasks
of large-scale scenarios for its photo-realistic synthesis results.
S-NeRF [2] improves the camera pose’s modeling for learning
better neural representations from street views. Block-NeRF
[58], NeRF-XL [59], and Mega-NeRF [60] partitions the
scene spatially and trains separate NeRFs for each partition.
Methods like Switch-NeRF [61], SUDS [3], and RoDus [62]
are designed to learn urban scene decomposition of static
and dynamic elements. Swift-Mapping [63] proposes a sparse
hybrid sampling strategy and hierarchical latent vectors to
achieve the online neural implicit dense mapping for urban
scenes. However, aforementioned methods learn the implicit
representation of a scene solely from input images and corre-
sponding poses, fail to utilize the geometry information in a
comprehensive manner.
Point-based rendering [4], [64], [65] incorporates geometric
priors from sparse point cloud information, enabling a more
accurate and faster scene synthesis. NPBG [66] synthesizes
high-quality indoor views from point clouds by learning
neural descriptors to encode local geometry and appearance.
NPBG++ [67] utilizes multi-view observations to further pre-
dict the neural descriptors for each point. READ [11] proposes
a rendering network to learn neural descriptors from sparse
point clouds, enabling synthesis of large-scale scenes. There-
fore, the point-based neural rendering method is a promising
candidate to facilitate our framework to achieve photo-realistic
dense rendering in the real-time.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. System Overview
As shown in Fig. 1, our SPORTS framework is fed with
image sequences It of a monocular video, simultaneously
reconstructs a sparse point cloud map, estimates the camera
poses ξt relative to the world map, and synthesizes the novel
scene, from the point cloud P. SPORTS consists of three
modules: the video panoptic segmentation (VPS), the visual
odometry (VO), and the scene rendering (SR). The VPS
module fuses the geometric information obtained from VO
to output the panoptic segmentation results. The VO module
performs the estimation of the camera poses, the depth, and
the optical flows, and estimation performance is enhanced by
harvesting the semantic information from the VPS module.
These two modules mutually facilitate each other through
recursive interaction. The SR module aims to synthesize the
photo-realistic scenes through the obtained sparse point cloud
map. The motivation of SPORTS lies in strengthening the
correlation between VO and VPS tasks, leading to the fine-
grained 3D scene understanding.
B. Enhanced Video Panoptic Segmentation
The video panoptic segmentation processes monocular im-
ages input It to conduct instance segmentation, semantic
segmentation, and instance tracking tasks, as shown in the Fig.
2. The video panoptic segmentation result is also exploited for
VO module in the next stage. Inspired by Video K-Net [27],
we leverage a group of learnable kernels to perform video
panoptic segmentation.

<!-- page 4 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
4
Fig. 2: The Diagram of Our Enhanced Video Panoptic Segmentation (VPS) Module. We warp the feature map zt−1 generated by the neck of the
reference frame It−1 via leveraging poses, depth, and optical flow. The warped feature map zw
t−1 is then fused with the feature map zt of the key frame It
through i fusion modules, resulting in i fused feature maps {z1∗
t , z2∗
t , ..., zi∗
t }. This approach adaptively matches the feature maps with the kernel update
heads by paying attention to the geometric knowledge, renamed as AG Fusion (Attention-based Adaptive Geometry Fusion, highlighted in red lines). Totally,
our VPS module is enhanced via four levels of information exchanges (abbreviated as EX), including AG Fusion (EX 1), Kernels Fusion (EX 2), Kernels
Linking (EX 3), and Kernels Embedding (EX 4), more details about AG Fusion is elaborated in Section III-B3 and Fig. 3.
1) Image Panoptic Segmentation:
Firstly, image-level
panoptic segmentation step utilizes ResNet50, fθe, as the
backbone network to extract multi-scale feature maps, zt, from
images, which can be denoted as:
zt = fθe(It)
(1)
Then, a decoder gθd with weights θd is used to generate
the panoptic segmentation results, Span
t
, which include both
semantic segments Ssem
t
and instance segments Sins
t . The
panoptic segmentation result for each pixel u is obtained via:
Span
t
(u | zt) = gθd(u, zt)
(2)
The multi-scale feature maps zt is fed into the fusion stage
for tracking and odometry. And Span
t
is further utilized in the
odometry module and scene rendering module.
2) Kernels Embedding, Kernels Linking, and Kernels
Fusion: In order to enhance segmentation consistency be-
tween frames, kernels fusion and linking strategies inspired
by [27] are utilized to obtain kernels embeddings. As shown
in Fig. 2, we first define a key image Ikey
t
from input images,
reference images Iref
t
are randomly selected from its temporal
neighborhoods, which is constrained by a window size w. The
index of Iref
t
is within the range of [t −w, t + w].
Then, two kernels, Kkey and Kref, are inferred correspond-
ingly for feature embeddings, each kernel is responsible to
predict a mask for either an instance or a stuff label. By
following the Quasi-Dense [29] learning, the matching of
kernels between two sampled frames is deemed as positive
if their corresponding masks have an IoU higher than α1, or
negative if their IoU lower than α2. To be noticed, the IoU
is calculated between the two regions that associated with the
same object. And only the kernels matching the ground truth
mask are optimized for mitigating the noise of the failure
matching.
Assuming
there
are
V
matched
kernels,
{Kv, v
=
1, 2, ..., V }, as training samples on the Ikey
t , and K matched
kernels, {Kk, k = 1, 2, ..., K}, as comparison targets on the
Iref
t , where {V < N | Kv ∈Kkey}, {K < N | Kk ∈Kref}, and
N is the total number of kernels. Then the loss function of
our tracking task is summarized as:
Ltrack = −
X
k+
log
ev·k+
ev·k+ + P
k−ev·k−,
(3)
Here, v, k+, k−respectively denote the kernel embeddings
of the training sample Kv, its positive target, and negative
targets in Kk.
An auxiliary loss is also designed below, where c is 1 if the
match of two samples is positive, and 0 otherwise.
Laux = (
v · k
||v|| · ||k|| −c)2,
(4)
As shown in Fig. 2, more information exchange of kernels
are applied by following [27], kernel linking is applied to
perform interaction along the temporal dimension, and kernel
fusion is leveraged to maintain segmentation consistency, and
tackle the large motion and scale variation occurred in the
scene. To be noticed, we employ the Video K-Net [27] model
as the baseline of VPS, in the practical applications, other off-
the-shelf segmentation models can be utilized by following the
same fashion.
3) Attention-based Adaptive Geometry Fusion (AG Fu-
sion): Video panoptic segmentation aims to obtain panoptic
segmentation results Span
t
for each frame and maintain consis-
tency across frames. FuseTrack [23] attempts to enroll optical
flow information for features fusion and track them based on
feature similarity. PVO [28] explores the depth information
on top of camera poses and geometric information to enhance
the perception of the 3D world. However, these approaches

<!-- page 5 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
5
Fig. 3: An Illustration Diagram of Our Proposed AG Fusion Module. W, H, and C represent the width, height, and number of channels of the input
features, respectively. The feature map zt and the warped feature map zw
t−1 are concatenated and made up by multiple pyramid scales. For each scale, the
feature vector zi is processed in parallel by ith branches, where the channel dimension of zi is 2C as well. The zi is re-weighted using channel-attention
mechanism and then passed through a convolutional layer of kernel size n × n × 2C. The fused feature map zi∗
t
for a branch is obtained by processing all
the pyramid scale of feature maps.
overlook the correlation between cross-frame features and are
unable to adjust for the network complexity of decoders, which
hinders their performance in environments with complex scene
changes.
The panoptic segmentation result St
pan is further utilized in
both of the odometry and the scene rendering, while the multi-
scale feature map zt is fed into the fusion stage. During the
fusion stage, depth Dt, camera pose ξt, and optical flow Ft
obtained from the Dense Bundle Adjustment Layer (DBA) in
the VO module are used to warp the features from the previous
frame to the current frame, generating a new fused feature
map. The warping process is achieved through optical flow:
It+1(x) ≈It(x + f(x))
(5)
Where the vector x represents the pixel position in the
image. It(x) represents the pixel value of position x at tth
frame, and It+1(x) represents the predicted pixel value at
t+1th frame. The function f(x) denotes the optical flow field,
describing the displacement vector from time t to time t + 1.
With pose transformation, the depth-axis displacement of
the same pixel in the next frame can be estimated, allowing for
depth prediction in the subsequent frame. The warping order
of each pixel in the optical flow field is determined based on
depth, prioritizing pixels at larger distances. In the case of pixel
warping conflicts, the later-warped pixel values overwrite the
previous ones at the same coordinates, ensuring the accuracy
of foreground details.
As shown in Fig. 2, our attention-based adaptive geometry
fusion module utilizes depth Dt, pose ξt, and optical flow Ft
information obtained from visual odometry (VO) module to
map features from the previous frame It−1 to the current frame
It, generates a warped feature map. By fusing the features
of the current frame with the warped features, we obtain
novel fused features for the current frame, called fused feature
map. Here, the fused feature map is adaptively propagated to
different stages of kernels updated module.
The feature fusion procedures are further shown in Fig.
3, zt is the feature map at time t, and zw
t−1 is the warped
feature map at time t −1, we firstly warp the zt−1 at the
pixel level using geometric information to obtain the warped
zw
t−1, where zw
t−1 ∈RH×W ×C, C is the number of channels,
H and W are height and width of feature maps. In the
previous work like [27], fused feature z∗
t is directly obtained
through a convolutional layer with ReLU activation. However,
this rudimentary method may struggle to handle complex
scene changes. Therefore, we introduce a channel attention
mechanism to perform weighted learning on the different
channels of feature maps, enabling the fusion module to ignore
unimportant features.
We concatenate the warped zw
t−1 with zt and learn channel
weights through channel attention mechanism to obtain fused
feature map z∗
t :
z∗
t = A ⊗(c(zw
t−1, zt))
(6)
A is the computed attention weight, which is a vector of
length 2 × C. Finally, a convolutional layer with kernel size
n × n × 2C is used to obtain a fused feature map zi∗
t of size
H × W × C. The kernel size determines the receptive field of
the convolutional network and increases with the enhancement
of image resolution.
VPS module employs multiple layers of Kernel Update
Heads to continuously update kernels using feature maps.
The key novelty is that we fuse the feature maps used by
each layer of Kernel Update Heads separately, allowing the
network to adaptively learn fusion strategies for different
layers. And our channel weights are not dedicated to a specific
channel attention network, it can be easily adapted to multiple
Attention-based networks.

<!-- page 6 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
6
4) Loss Function and Training: Through the kernels
embedding, the kernels linking, the kernels fusion, and the
features fusion, our total loss function for enhanced video
panoptic segmentation is represented as L = λclsLcls+λceLce+
λdiceLdice +λtrackLtrack +λauxLaux, where Lcls denotes the focal
loss [68] designed for classification, Lce and Ldice stand for
the Cross-Entropy (CE) loss and Dice loss [69], [70] designed
for segmentation. As described in Section III-B2, losses Ltrack
and Laux are designed exclusively for instance trackings. The
target assignment adopts the Hungarian assignment strategy
[71] by executing the end-to-end training paradigm.
5) Post-Matching: We notice that PVO employs a simple
IoU-based matching approach, which exhibits strong perfor-
mance in adjacent frame matching but leads to error propaga-
tion and performs poorly on long video sequences. This not
only degrades segmentation quality but also affects the local-
ization accuracy of the VO module due to incorrect optical
flow pixel matching. In contrast, the learning-based method
used in Video K-Net performs better on long sequences but
suffers from misclassification in adjacent frames. Using IoU to
enforce adjacent-frame consistency can further degrade long-
sequence performance due to uncertain erroneous frames.
To address these issues, we design a novel matching module
to meet the requirements of both VPS and VO, as illustrated in
Fig. 4. First, we determine the semantic consistency of object
categories between two frames based on IoU. If categories
differ, we classify both as unknown to prevent further error
propagation. If they match, checking their instance consis-
tency, where instance IDs in the current frame are matched
with those in the previous frame. Pixels classified as unknown
are excluded from the optical flow matching process in VO
as part of dynamic objects, thereby mitigating the impact of
incorrect category assignments.
Fig. 4: An Illustrative Diagram of Our Post-Matching Process.
C. Enhanced Visual Odometry
In visual odometry, filtering out the interference of dynamic
objects is crucial. The front end of DROID-SLAM [43]
optimizes camera pose and depth residuals by iteratively opti-
mizing optical flow residuals and confidence. Inspired by PVO
[28], we also combine panoptic segmentation information,
Span
t
, with optical flow for the motion estimation, which helps
to improve confidence estimation and thereby enhances the
accuracy of camera pose estimation, the entire diagram is
illustrated in Fig. 5.
The panoptic-aware flow features, the dual-frame 4D corre-
lation volumes, and the features acquired by the context en-
coder are fed to the GRU and convolutional layers, generating
a dynamic mask Md
ij ∈RH×W ×2, a correlation confidence
map wij ∈RH×W ×2, and a dense optical flow delta ∆Fij ∈
RH×W ×2. Panoptic-aware dynamic mask Mdp
ij
is obtained
from Md
ij via fine-tuning the Span
t
, stuff backgrounds are
defined as static and foreground objects with higher dynamic
probabilities are deemed as dynamic. Then, panoptic-aware
confidence is defined as:
wp
ij = σ(wij + (1 −Mdp
ij ) · η)
(7)
η is the scaling ratio of dynamic objects. The summation
of the flow discrepancy ∆Fij and the raw optical flow Fij
is propagated to the Dense Bundle Adjustment (DBA) layer
[43] to optimize the depth and poses. The foundation model
is leveraged to estimate the training labels of depth maps, if
the ground truth value of depth is not provided by the sensor.
The panoptic refinement procedure is iteratively executed
via N times until the convergence. Following DROID-SLAM
[43], the residuals of the pose, the depth and the dynamic
mask are respectively added to the current pose ξ, depth D
and dynamic mask Md:
ξ(k+1) = e(∆ξ(k)) · ξ(k),
(8)
Θ(k+1) = ∆Θ(k) + Θ(k), Θ ∈{D, Md}.
(9)
We concatenate D and Md into Θ. The correspondence is
computed for each iteration using ξ and D. Given a pixel
coordinate grid ui ∈RH×W ×2 in frame i, we calculate its
dense correspondence field uij as follows:
uij = Πc(ξij · Π−1
c (ui, Di)), uij ∈RH×W ×2,
(10)
ξij = ξj · ξ−1
i
,
(11)
For each edge (i, j) ∈E in the frame graph as shown
in DROID-SLAM [43]. Πc represents the camera projection,
which maps a set of 3D points to the image, while Π−1
c
refers
to the re-projection which map the coordinate grid ui to the
3D point cloud. uij indicates the mapping procedure of pixel
ui from frame i to the coordinates of jth frame.
The DBA layers map a set of latent vectors to a set of pose
update ξ
′ and pixel depth update D
′. The cost function of the
whole frame is:
E(ξ
′, D
′) =
X
(i,j)∈E
∥u∗
ij −Πc(ξ
′
ij ◦Π−1
c (ui, D
′
i))∥2P
ij, (12)
X
ij
= diagwuij
(13)
The Equation 12 and Equation 13 is optimized by leveraging
the Gauss-Newton optimizer.
After incorporating panoptic segmentation information, the
excluded regions due to dynamic objects generates vacuum
areas in the depth map and leads to the relatively sparser point
cloud in 3D. For a given frame at time t, by following the same
procedure as described in Equation 7 to Equation 13, we feed a
dynamic mask without segmentation refinement into the DBA
layers to obtain a denser depth map D
′′
t . The blank regions B

<!-- page 7 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
7
Fig. 5: The Diagram of Our Enhanced VO Module. Our method combines the video panoptic segmentation information, Span
t
, with optical flow for the
motion estimation, iteratively enhances the accuracy of camera pose estimation. The VO module outputs final pose, depth map and optical flow to facilitate
the VPS in return.
in D
′
t are then filled with the corresponding pixel values from
D
′′
t to generate a more complete depth map. The final map
after above depth propagation is calculated as:
Dt =
X
(u,v)∈B
D
′
t + D
′′
t
(14)
D. Scene Rendering
Considering the rendering fidelity and computational re-
sources, our scene rendering module is motivated by READ
[11] method. The sparse point cloud P = {p1, p2, ..., pn} are
obtained via VO module from input driving scene images
I and known camera parameters. Neural descriptors Nd =
{nd
1, nd
2, ..., nd
n} are computed from the P. Each 3D point
pi = {xi, yi, zi} is associated with a neural descriptor vector
nd
i , to encode the local geometry and photometric charac-
teristics. The SR module consists of three parts, which are
rasterization, sampling, and the ω −net [72] based rendering.
1) Rasterization: Given the intrinsic and extrinsic param-
eters of the camera, we follow previous work [11] by using
an 8-dimensional neural descriptor to represent RGB values
observed from different viewpoints of the scene. In the raster-
ization phase, images with size H×W are captured by pinhole
camera C, we construct a pyramid of rasterized raw image
{Sk}K
k=1 (K=4 in all our experiments), Sk has the spatial
size of
H
2k × W
2k , which is formed by assigning the neural
descriptor of the point passing the depth test to each pixel.
Subsequently, it is projected onto pixels under the camera’s
projection. Essentially, the neural descriptor nd
i encodes the
local 3D scene content around pi into a feature vector. Neural
descriptors of occluded points are screened out via Z-buffer
scheme, and the holes generated by sparsity of point cloud P
is filled via cubic projection [11].
2) Sampling: Sampling for point clouds is necessary for
driving scenarios with data collected from thousands of meters.
Due to the uneven distribution of point clouds in the different
driving scenes, we utilize the Monte Carlo method [73] to
sample a large amount of driving scene data, which is defined
as S∗
e ←argTopnQ(Ie). For the image set Se in training phase
e, the quality Q(Ie) of an image Ie is calculated using the
perceptual loss [74]. We select the worst-performing n samples
from each phase as the training data to improve the learning
efficiency. The patch sampling strategy similar to READ [11]
is also applied to manipulate the image resolution for reducing
memory usage.
3) ω −net based Rendering: Sparse point clouds often
contain holes and outliers, which can degrade rendering qual-
ity. The purpose of the rendering network is to learn reliable
neural descriptors N d
i to represent the scene. However, neural
descriptors N d
i
learned from point clouds still suffer from
holes and surface bleeding. Following previous work [11],
[72], we exploit the ω −net to fuse multi-scale features. Our
model fuse features at different scales and at the same scale
to infer the missing points in sparse point clouds, which takes
advantage of the complementary information.
IV. EXPERIMENT
In this section, we comprehensively evaluate the different
modules of our SPORTS framework and thoroughly vali-
date their generalization capability across various datasets.
Specifically, for video panoptic segmentation task, we evaluate
the segmentation performance on the VKITTI2 [75] and the
VIPER [76] datasets. For visual odometry and scene rendering
modules, we examine two datasets with dynamic scenes,
VKITTI2 [75] and dynamic KITTI [77], to assess the precision
of estimated camera trajectories and the fidelity of rendered
scenes. Additionally, we perform ablation studies to manifest
the effectiveness of our framework design.
A. Experimental Setup
1) Datasets: We evaluate the performance of our frame-
work on three public datasets: the KITTI dataset [77], the

<!-- page 8 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
8
VKITTI2 dataset [75], and the VIPER dataset [76]. The
KITTI [77] is a dataset that captures real-world traffic scenes,
covering a wide variety of static and dynamic objects across
different environments, including highways, rural roads, and
urban settings. The VKITTI2 [75] is a synthetic dataset which
consists of 5 cloned sequences from the KITTI tracking bench-
mark, including RGB images, depth data, class segmentation,
instance segmentation, camera poses, optical flow, and scene
flow data for each sequence. The VIPER [76] is a high-
quality video benchmark that offers instance and semantic
segmentation labels, along with optical flow and camera poses
ground truth.
2) Evaluation Metrics: The commonly-used metrics are
adopted to evaluate the performance of our framework. For
the performance of the visual odometry (VO) module, we
employ the Root Mean Square Error (RMSE) of the absolute
trajectory error as the evaluation metric. To evaluate the
rendering quality, we leverage Peak Signal-to-Noise Ratio
(PSNR), Structural Similarity Index Measure (SSIM), and
perceptual loss (VGG loss) as the evaluation criterion. Besides,
we incorporate a perceptual metric called Learned Perceptual
Image Patch Similarity (LPIPS) into the rendering evaluation.
Additionally, for evaluating the quality of panoptic video
segmentation, we utilize the Video Panoptic Quality (VPQ)
metric to measure the segmentation performance.
3) Implementation Details: This section details the imple-
mentation of our framework, with a focus on the training
process. We implement our model using PyTorch and the
MMDetection toolkit. The network training of our three main
modules, the video panoptic segmentation (VPS) module, the
visual odometry (VO) module, and the scene rendering (SR)
module, are divided into four stages. First, our kernes-based
video panoptic segmentation module is trained on datasets
such as VKITTI2, where the frame size is 375 × 1242. We
set AG fusion kernel size is 3 × 3. We adopt the AdamW
optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e-4, a weight decay
of 0.0001, and a batch size of 8 images. The window size
w of reference searching is defined as 2. The values of α1
and α2 in the kernel embedding stage are set to 0.7 and 0.3
respectively. Then, the training of the VO module follows the
PVO. The scaling ratio of the dynamic object η is set as 10.
We trained this module on the VKITTI2 dataset for 80,000
steps using an Nvidia RTX-4090 GPU, which took about two
days. Next, during the training of the AG fusion module, real
depth, optical flow, and pose information are used as geometric
priors to align the features. The backbone network of the pre-
trained panoptic video segmentation module is kept frozen,
and only the fusion module is trained. We use the AdamW
optimizer with an initial learning rate of 1e-5 and a batch size
of 8 images for optimization. Lastly, the training of the scene
rendering module is motivated by READ, with a learning rate
of 1e-4. The input of the scene rendering module is the sparse
point cloud obtained from the VO module. All the trainings
described above are conducted on a single Nvidia RTX-4090
GPU.
B. Results of the Video Panoptic Segmentation
We select two instance-based video panoptic segmentation
methods, PVO and Video K-Net, as baselines for the com-
parison. PVO integrates visual odometry and image panoptic
segmentation tasks, enhances the cross-frame tracking per-
formance with geometric information. Video K-Net learns to
simultaneously segment and track things and stuff in a video
using the kernel-based appearance modeling and the cross-
temporal kernel interaction. Our focus is on comparing the
adaptive geometry fusion (AG Fusion) module with other
existing methods.
1) VKITTI2 Dataset: The synthetic KITTI2 dataset in-
cludes five cloned sequences from the KITTI tracking bench-
mark, providing RGB, depth, semantic segmentation, instance
segmentation, camera poses, optical flow, and scene flow data
for each sequence. Following PVO, we partition each sequence
of the dataset into training, validation, and test sets at a ratio
of 7:1:1. Our quantitative results are illustrated in Table I,
our SPORTS achieves the best performance in terms of VPQ
quality. To be noticed, the fusion module of PVO exhibits a
decrease in performance when combined with Video K-Net.
However, our module not only outperforms PVO but also
facilitates the original Video K-Net to further enhance the
performance. And our post-matching strategy further refines
the performance for instances registration. The VPQ value is
increased by 3.061% and 3.074% respectively when combin-
ing our AG Fusion with PVO and Video K-Net, which brings
the average boost of 3.07%. As shown in Fig. 6, the baseline
methods using Video K-Net encounters inter-class confusion
and classification failures, while our approach effectively
obtains consistent classification results across frames. More
comprehensive qualitative results for the temporal panoptic
segmentation are shown in Fig. 7, we compare our method
with other two methods. Both PVO and Video K-Net exhibit
the classification failures, inter-class confusion, and instance
tracking failures, while our method is able to segment more
precise results when compared to the ground truth. To be
noticed, the VPS results shown in Fig. 7 shows precision
improvements for ID tracking of short video clips, while the
long-term video panoptic segmentation via proposed method
is still open to explore.
2) VIPER Dataset: The VIPER is a high-quality video
segmentation benchmark dataset that provides both instance
segmentation and semantic segmentation labels. However, the
geometric information of VIPER only includes ground-truth
Video K-Net [27]
Ours
Fig. 6: Visualization of segmentation improvements over the baseline
method (Video K-Net). The baseline method relied on the Video K-Net is
prone to the classification failure and the inter-class fusion marked in yellow
boxes. (Best viewed in color and by zooming in.)

<!-- page 9 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
9
TABLE I: The Quantitative Comparison of Video Panoptic Segmentation Performance on the VKITTI2 (val) Dataset. For the PVO + AG Fusion
method in the second row, we incorporate our adaptive geometry fusion mechanism to replace the fusion procedure of PVO. For the Video K-Net + PVO
Fusion in the fourth row, we add the fusion mechanism on top of the original Vido K-Net architecture. And ‘Ours’ stands for the proposed kernel-based
method with an adaptive geometry fusion (AG Fusion) and post-matching strategy. Our method outperforms Video K-Net and PVO and their derived methods.
‘VK-Net’ = ‘Video K-Net’, ‘F.’ = ‘Fusion’, ‘Mem.’ = Memory Usage, ‘Para.’ = Parameter Number. Our frame rate is half of the PVO and VKNet methods
with similar model size.
Methods
Temporal Window Size
VPQ
Mem.
Para.
FPS
k=0
k=5
k=10
k=15
(GB)
(MB)
PVO [28]
56.7 / 72.6 / 52.4
49.9 / 50.6 / 49.7
46.0 / 38.6 / 48.1
43.7 / 31.6 / 47.0
49.0 / 48.3 / 49.3
3.23
46.7
14.3
PVO [28] + AG F.
57.4 / 72.7 / 53.2
51.5 / 54.6 / 50.6
47.6 / 42.5 / 49.0
45.4 / 35.3 / 48.1
50.5 / 51.3 / 50.2
3.23
45.79
14.3
VK-Net [27]
60.7 / 58.4 / 61.3
56.2 / 47.6 / 58.5
53.7 / 40.1 / 57.4
52.3 / 35.3 / 56.9
55.7 / 45.3 / 58.4
3.99
41.55
13.3
VK-Net + PVO F.
60.3 / 57.0 / 61.3
55.8 / 45.3 / 58.6
53.3 / 37.9 / 57.5
52.1 / 33.6 / 57.1
55.3 / 43.4 / 58.6
4.18
42.73
7.2
Ours w/o Match
60.9 / 57.7 / 61.8
57.1 / 48.1 / 59.5
54.7 / 41.8 / 58.2
53.6 / 37.9 / 57.8
56.6 / 46.4 / 59.3
4.17
42.29
7.2
Ours
61.5 / 57.2 / 62.6
57.5 / 46.6 / 60.5
55.1 / 40.2 / 59.1
53.9 / 36.3 / 58.7
57.0 / 45.1 / 60.2
4.19
42.29
7.1
TABLE II: The Quantitative Comparison of Video Panoptic Segmentation Performance on the VIPER (val) Dataset. The compared methods here
keeps equivalent to Table I, it is obvious our proposed method achieves best performance on VIPER Dataset as well. The computational efficiency analysis
for VIPER dataset is same to Table I.
Methods
Temporal Window Size
VPQ
k=0
k=5
k=10
k=15
PVO [28]
23.4 / 10.3 / 33.5
21.8 / 7.1 / 33.1
20.7 / 5.1 / 32.7
20.2 / 3.7 / 32.8
21.5 / 6.5 / 33.0
PVO [28] + AG Fusion
23.7 / 11.0 / 33.4
22.1 / 8.0 / 32.9
21.1 / 6.1 / 32.6
20.4 / 4.7 / 32.5
21.8 / 7.4 / 32.8
Video K-Net [27]
34.3 / 17.7 / 47.1
31.2 / 12.3 / 45.8
30.4 / 10.0 / 46.0
30.2 / 8.9 / 46.6
31.5 / 12.2 / 46.3
Video K-Net [27] + PVO Fusion
34.4 / 17.7 / 47.3
31.5 / 12.6 / 46.1
30.4 / 10.2 / 46.0
30.2 / 9.0 / 46.5
31.6 / 12.3 / 46.4
Ours w/o Post-Match
34.5 / 17.8 / 47.3
31.5 / 12.7 / 46.0
30.6 / 10.6 / 46.0
30.3 / 9.4 / 46.5
31.7 / 12.6 / 46.4
Ours
34.8 / 17.4 / 49.2
31.7 / 12.3 / 47.9
30.8 / 10.3 / 47.8
30.4 / 9.3 / 48.2
31.9 / 12.3 / 48.2
RGB image
PVO [28]
Video K-Net [27]
Ours
Ground Truth
Fig. 7: The Qualitative Results of Video Panoptic Segmentation on the VKITTI2 Seq 01 (The first two rows), VKITTI2 Seq 18 (The 3rd and 4th
rows), and VKITTI2 Seq 20 (The last two rows). Stuff backgrounds within same categories are painted with the same color, and thing objects with the
same predicted instance IDs are labeled with the same color. The box areas restricted by red dotted lines are corresponding to tracking errors for instance
IDs, it manifests that Video K-Net sometimes failed to track vehicles on the boundary of the image (Red box area in the 2nd row), and both PVO and Video
K-Net are struggling to track small vehicles (Red box area in the 4th row). And the box areas restricted by yellow dotted lines are classification failure (Street
lamps and poles for PVO results) and inter-class confusion (Last two rows of PVO). (Best viewed in color and by zooming in.)
optical flow and camera pose data, without providing the
depth information, and its optical flow data is irregularly
discontinuous between frames. We reorganize the VIPER’s
labels and unify the instance and semantic labels into a
panoptic segmentation label, and we utilize a foundation model
called Depth-Anything [78] to estimate depth and deem it as
the ground-truth data for training.
We select and pre-process the first six daytime scenes from
VIPER for the training and the inferring. For the inferring,
we utilize the last 30 frames from each video and we utilize
180 images in total. Due to the image resolution of VIPER is
higher, we set the AG Fusion kernel size to 7 × 7 to obtain
the best performance, more details are discussed in section
IV-E. Table II summarizes the VPQ results by comparing with
different methods on the VIPER dataset, where we observe a
consistent result as shown in the VKITTI2 dataset. Due to
the depth information of the VIPER is estimated by Depth
Anything [78] algorithm, the performance on the VIPER
manifest that our fusion strategy can be extended to the scenes
without ground truth depth values.
C. Results of the Visual Odometry
In this section, the localization results on VKITTI2 and
KITTI datasets are presented to validate the effectiveness of

<!-- page 10 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
10
TABLE III: The VO Precision Comparison with Different Odometry Models on the VKITTI2 (val). ATE metric is presented here, and the lower of
ATE value is, the better of the odometry. From top row to the bottom row, the results of different methods are sorted from worst to the best based on the
average RMSE out of the value of 5 sequences. (VPS→VO) stands for the VPS executes one round of iterative optimization, (VPS→VO × 2) stands for
the VPS executes two rounds of iterative optimization, ‘Ours’ stands for the combination between our kernel based feature extraction and our AG Fusion.
Incorporating our AG Fusion mechanism boosts the performance of odometry, which can be observed via comparing PVO (VPS→VO × 2) and PVO + AG
Fusion (VPS→VO × 2). mber. Our frame rate is slightly slower than PVO with the similar memory consumption.
Methods
vkitti01
vkitti02
vkitti06
vkitti18
vkitti20
Avg
Memory Usage (GB)
FPS
DROID-SLAM [43]
1.091
0.025
0.113
1.156
8.285
2.134
13.22
8.4
DOT [79]
1.140
0.140
0.070
1.000
9.120
2.294
-
-
DytanVO [80]
10.654
5.262
1.226
8.397
18.290
8.766
-
-
DynaSLAM [81]
27.830
-
-
-
2.807
-
-
-
PVO [28] (VPS→VO)
0.374
0.058
0.113
0.957
4.260
1.152
15.31
6.6
PVO [28] (VPS→VO × 2)
0.372
0.057
0.113
0.952
3.808
1.060
15.31
6.0
PVO [28] + AG Fusion (VPS→VO × 2)
0.371
0.053
0.113
0.946
3.729
1.042
15.95
5.8
Ours (VPS→VO)
0.369
0.055
0.113
0.951
3.290
0.956
15.95
5.4
Ours (VPS→VO × 2)
0.365
0.051
0.113
0.943
3.057
0.906
15.95
5.0
our enhanced VO.
TABLE IV: The VO Performance Comparison with Different Odometry
Models on the KITTI. Similar to the experiment on VKITTI2 dataset, ‘Ours’
stands for the combination between our kernel based feature extraction and
our AG fusion. (VPS→VO × 2) is abbreviated to (× 2) for simplicity.
Method
KITTI09
KITTI10
Avg
ORB-SLAM3 [82]
64.74
80.17
72.455
DROID-SLAM [43]
46.40
11.31
28.855
LIFT-SLAM [83]
59.62
29.87
44.745
DynaSLAM [81]
41.91
7.519
24.715
DSO [36]
28.1
24.0
26.050
DeFlowSLAM [84]
27.8
4.2
16.000
PVO [28] (VPS→VO)
14.958
8.891
11.925
PVO [28] (× 2)
13.857
8.812
11.335
PVO [28] + AG fusion (× 2)
13.432
8.592
11.012
Ours (VPS→VO)
14.438
8.706
11.572
Ours (× 2)
12.793
8.572
10.683
1) VKITTI2 Dataset: We leverage the clone sequence
as the training set, the 15-degree rotation sequence as the
validation set, and the 30-degree rotation sequence as the
test set. As shown in Table III, we compare SPORTS with
four different VPS baseline models and their derived methods
for the odometry. Our method achieves more convincing
performance either with or without the iteration, it is obvious
to observe that the odometry precision is increased with every
one more iteration. Moreover, if our AG Fusion module is
directly integrated into the segmentation module of the PVO
[28], it also boost the odometry performance for PVO. And we
also notice that our method outperforms the SLAM systems
dedicated to the localization within dynamic scenes, DytanVO
[80] and DynaSLAM [81]. The memory usage and FPS results
in Table III manifest the high demand of computation power
for our VO method, we anticipate to accelerate it via patch-
based optical flow matching in the future work.
2) KITTI Dataset: We utilize sequences 09 and 10 from
the KITTI dataset to validate the odometry accuracy of our
system in more complex environments. We transfer the model
trained on the VKITTI2 dataset to the KITTI dataset. As
shown in Table IV, the pose estimation error of our method
is further reduced, which is same to the VKITTI2 results.
The trajectories comparison in Fig. 8 and Fig. 9 further
visualize the advantage of our model. In the case of complex
looped paths, such as sequence 09, our method generates
the noticeably better performance. For simpler paths, like
sequence 10, the trajectory difference needs to be zoomed in
to observe, our approach maintains an advantage by a slight
margin.
D. Results of the Scene Rendering
Our point-based rendering approach synthesizes sparse
point cloud views into the denser presentation. The camera
poses and point cloud are generated by the VO module of
PVO and our SPORTS respectively.
Fig. 8: Visualization of Estimated Trajectories of Three Methods on
KITTI Sequence 09. Different trajectories are aligned by same starting point
(0,0). Our trajectory, drawn in the blue line, is the closest to the gt trajectory,
drawn in the red dotted line.
Fig. 9: Visualization of Estimated Trajectories of Three Methods on
KITTI Sequence 10. The trajectory of sequence 10 is more smooth than
sequence 09, by zooming into the detail, we can observe our SPORTS
generates the trajectory which is closer to the gt trajectory.

<!-- page 11 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
11
TABLE V: The Quantitative Comparison of Scene Rendering with PVO (Multiple Datasets). Four aforementioned similarity metrics are evaluated with
different test intervals.
KITTI 09
KITTI 10
VKITTI2 20
VGG↓
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
VGG↓
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
VGG↓
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
Test every 100 frames
PVO [28]
518
22.64
0.2549
0.7150
551
21.70
0.2548
0.6974
519
19.80
0.2248
0.7186
Ours
487
23.05
0.2301
0.7426
499
22.19
0.2274
0.7436
485
20.09
0.2030
0.7381
Test every 10 frames
PVO [28]
517
23.16
0.2546
0.7172
547
22.46
0.2509
0.6975
510
21.15
0.2206
0.6964
Ours
492
23.22
0.2333
0.7423
491
23.02
0.2193
0.7476
476
21.36
0.2032
0.7269
KITTI Seq 09
KITTI Seq 10
VKITTI2 Seq 20
PVO [28]
Ours
GT
Fig. 10: The Qualitative Comparison of Novel View Synthesis at the Urban Streets and Highway Scenes on KITTI and VKITTI2 Benchmarks. In
the cases of vehicles (Red, Orange, and Yellow), buildings (Light Blue and Purple), text signs (Light Green), our SPORTS framework generates more realistic
results by estimating more superior poses than PVO. In the bottom rows, The three cropped boxes with same color are corresponding to the rendered areas
of PVO, Ours, and Ground Truth (GT), respectively. (Best viewed by zoom-in.)
PVO [28]
Ours
Fig. 11: Visualization of Point Cloud from Scene Rendering of Our Method and PVO. Our method generate denser and more complete point cloud,
especially for moving objects, as highlighted by the red boxes. More complete point cloud is beneficial to render precise views. (Best viewed by zoom-in.)
As shown in Table V, we conduct experiments on three
distinctive sequences, the KITTI sequence 09, the KITTI
sequence 10, and the VKITTI2 sequence 20. It shows that
with more accurate camera poses and point cloud positions,
more realistic scenes can be rendered. The visualization results
from different VO poses and cloud points are illustrated in Fig.
10. To demonstrate the effectiveness of our depth-propagation
strategy in VO, the point cloud with different density is shown
in Fig. 11.
In order to compare our SPORTS with more scene rendering
methods, we report view synthesis results in Table VI on all
sequences of VKITTI2, It is observed that the pose generated
by our SPORTS is better than the methods like no-pose
estimation and Colmap initialization. Our methods handles

<!-- page 12 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
12
TABLE VI: The Comparison of Scene Rendering with Other Methods.
The bold represents the best, and the underlined represents the second.
VKITTI2
Method
PSNR↑
LPIPS↓
SSIM↑
NeRF [46]
18.67
0.634
0.548
NeRF [46]+Time
19.03
0.587
0.574
iMAP [85]
20.02
-
-
NICE-SLAM [86]
19.15
-
-
Mip-NeRF [87]
19.91
-
-
Instant-NGP [88]
21.58
-
0.630
Splatam (masked) [89]
20.00
-
0.740
NSG [90]
23.41
0.317
0.689
Ours
22.39
0.199
0.727
dynamic scene rendering better than the NeRF + Time.
After learning neural descriptors from sparse point clouds,
our model is capable to synthesize novel views for urban
scenes. In Fig. 12, we further render several novel views
by rotating the observation directions in a fixed spot, to
demonstrate the effectiveness of our neural rendering approach
and its potential applications to boost the simulation efficiency
in the view-limited driving scenes.
E. Ablation Study
In this section, we verify the necessities of our updated
strategies through four ablation study experiments.
1) Iterative Interaction Mechanisms. Through the iterative
interaction with the VPS module, the geometric infor-
mation provided by the VO module can continuously
improve the segmentation performance and reduce ge-
ometric estimation errors in return. First three rows in
Table VII discloses that using VO-estimated geometric
information, indicating the more accurate geometric in-
formation obtained iteratively, can continuously enhance
the segmentation performance. Given more iterations,
the slight performance improvement is difficult to be
observed, and it can gradually approach the performance
of fusion using ground-truth geometric information.
2) Different Attention-based Mechanisms. The result of
combining our AG Fusion module with different channel
attention mechanisms, such as SE [33], CBAM [34],
ECA [30], and EMA [91] are reported at the last four
Original Image @ 0◦
Rendered Novel Images @ Different Angles
1◦
2◦
3◦
4◦
5◦
Rotate to the Left
Rotate to the Right
Fig. 12: Demonstration of Novel Views Synthesis Based on the Training
via VKITTI2 Data. Novel views are rendered by rotating the observation
directions at a fixed spot, 5 novel views with 1◦step are gradually rendered
for each side. The rendering result of left side is more geometric-realistic than
the right side, due to the field of views of original image. (Best viewed by
zooming in.)
rows of Table VII, it demonstrates the generalizability
of our fusion strategy and its capability to integrate with
other cutting-edge attention mechanisms.
3) Fusion Strategies. Through the ablation study in the
4th row and the last row of Table VII, we confirm
that AG Fusion strategy achieves better segmentation
performance compared to the vanilla fusion strategy.
AG Fusion strategy integrating the feature maps used by
each kernel update layer and adaptively learning fusion
weights for different layers, while vanilla fusion solely
connecting the feature maps generated by the backbone.
4) Fusion Kernel Sizes. We found that the convolution
TABLE VII: The Ablation Study Performance of Different Video Panoptic Segmentation Models on the VKITTI2.
Methods
VPQ with Different Temporal Window Size
VPQ Mean
k=0
k=5
k=10
k=15
Ours (VO→VPS)
60.8 / 57.7 / 61.6
56.0 / 45.6 / 58.9
53.6 / 37.9 / 57.9
52.0 / 32.6 /57.3
55.5 / 43.3 / 58.9
Ours (VO→VPS × 2)
60.8 / 57.7 / 61.7
56.1 / 45.1 / 59.2
53.6 / 37.0 / 58.2
52.2 / 31.7 /57.8
55.7 / 42.9 / 59.2
Ours (VO→VPS × 3)
60.8 / 57.7 / 61.7
56.1 / 44.9 / 59.3
53.7 / 36.9 / 58.4
52.3 / 31.5 /58.0
55.7 / 42.7 / 59.3
Ours w/ Vanilla Fusion [28]
60.5 / 56.1 / 61.7
55.4 / 43.2 / 58.7
52.5 / 34.7 / 27.3
50.8 / 29.1 /56.8
54.8 / 40.7 / 58.6
Ours w/ AG Fusion + SE [33]
60.7 / 57.2 / 61.7
56.6 / 45.6 / 59.5
53.9 / 37.6 / 58.4
52.6 / 32.5 / 58.1
55.9 / 43.2 / 59.4
Ours w/ AG Fusion + CBAM [34]
60.8 / 57.0 / 61.8
56.5 / 45.4 / 59.6
54.0 / 38.3 / 58.2
52.7 / 33.4 / 58.0
56.0 / 43.5 / 59.4
Ours w/ AG Fusion + ECA [30]
60.8 / 57.5 / 61.7
56.8 / 47.2 / 59.4
54.4 / 40.3 / 58.3
53.3 / 35.6 / 58.1
56.3 / 45.1 / 59.3
Ours w/ AG Fusion + EMA [91]
60.9 / 57.7 / 61.8
57.1 / 48.1 / 59.5
54.7/ 41.8 / 58.2
53.6 / 37.9 / 57.8
56.6 / 46.4 / 59.3
TABLE VIII: The Ablation Study Performance of Different AG Fusion kernel sizes on the VIPER.
Methods
VPQ with Different Temporal Window Size
VPQ Mean
k=0
k=5
k=10
k=15
Kernel Size = 3
34.0 / 17.3 / 46.9
31.1 / 12.1 / 45.7
30.0 / 9.4 / 45.7
29.6 / 8.0 /46.2
31.1 / 11.7 / 46.1
Kernel Size = 5
34.3 / 17.7 / 47.1
31.2 / 12.3 / 45.8
30.4 / 10.0 / 46.0
30.2 / 8.9 /46.6
31.5 / 12.2 / 46.3
Kernel Size = 7
34.5 / 17.8 / 47.3
31.5 / 12.7 / 46.0
30.6 / 10.6 / 46.0
30.3 / 9.4 /46.5
31.7 / 12.6 / 46.4

<!-- page 13 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
13
kernel size of the fusion module needs to be adjusted
based on the image resolutions. In the VKITTI2 dataset,
where the image resolution is 1242 × 375, the ideal
kernel size is 3 × 3. However, when training the VIPER
dataset with a resolution of 1920 × 1080, it needs to
increase the kernel size to 7 × 7, to achieve a larger
receptive field, for a more robust segmentation results.
Table VIII reports the VPQ results on the VIPER dataset
with different kernel sizes.
V. CONCLUSION
This paper presents SPORTS, a multi-modal based simul-
taneous localization and mapping framework designed for the
holistic understanding of the urban scenes. The core discovery
of our SPORTS is that incorporating an attention-based adap-
tive geometry fusion mechanism is able to boost the segmenta-
tion performance, which is reversely beneficial to the odometry
and instances tracking tasks. We also introduces a point-based
rendering method to render photo-realistic scenes based on the
high-quality pose estimation of odometry. Our SPORTS is the
first work to be evaluated across multiple datasets, to validate
that optical flows, poses, and depth information can effectively
enhance the vision-based scenes understanding. One drawback
for our current work is the strict requirement to the dataset,
which impedes the SPORTS to be compared with more related
methods. Our SPORTS manifests that digging out the mutual
benefits of stacking multiple tasks, such as segmentation,
tracking, localization, and rendering, into a unified framework
is a promising direction to be explored, and we plan to enroll
the 3D dense mapping task in to our framework in the future
work.
REFERENCES
[1] Y.-L. Jin, Z.-Y. Ji, D. Zeng, and X.-P. Zhang, “Vwp: An efficient drl-
based autonomous driving model,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia,
vol. 26, pp. 2096–2108, 2024.
[2] Z. Xie, J. Zhang, W. Li, F. Zhang, and L. Zhang, “S-nerf: Neural radiance
fields for street views,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00749, 2023.
[3] H. Turki, J. Y. Zhang, F. Ferroni, and D. Ramanan, “Suds: Scalable
urban dynamic scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp. 12 375–12 385.
[4] Z. Li, C. Wu, L. Zhang, and J. Zhu, “Dgnr: Density-guided neural point
rendering of large driving scenes,” IEEE Transactions on Automation
Science and Engineering, 2024.
[5] B. Katz, J. D. Carlo, and S. Kim, “Mini cheetah: A platform for
pushing the limits of dynamic quadruped control,” in 2019 International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2019, pp. 6295–6301.
[6] F. Vezzi, J. Ding, A. Raffin, J. Kober, and C. D. Santina, “Two-stage
learning of highly dynamic motions with rigid and articulated soft
quadrupeds,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2024, pp. 9720–9726.
[7] J. Sun, Q. Zhang, Y. Duan, X. Jiang, C. Cheng, and R. Xu, “Prompt,
plan, perform: Llm-based humanoid control via quantized imitation
learning,” in 2024 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Automation (ICRA), 2024, pp. 16 236–16 242.
[8] C. Shi, L. Fang, H. Wu, X. Xian, Y. Shi, and L. Lin, “Nitedr:
Nighttime image de-raining with cross-view sensor cooperative learning
for dynamic driving scenes,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 26,
pp. 9203–9215, 2024.
[9] W. Zhou, X. Lin, J. Lei, L. Yu, and J.-N. Hwang, “Mffenet: Multiscale
feature fusion and enhancement network for rgb–thermal urban road
scene parsing,” IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 24, pp. 2526–
2538, 2022.
[10] H. Zhang, X. Wang, X. Yin, M. Du, C. Liu, and Q. Chen, “Geometry-
constrained scale estimation for monocular visual odometry,” IEEE
Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 24, pp. 3144–3156, 2021.
[11] Z. Li, L. Li, and J. Zhu, “Read: Large-scale neural scene rendering
for autonomous driving,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence, vol. 37, no. 2, 2023, pp. 1522–1529.
[12] X. Zhou, Z. Lin, X. Shan, Y. Wang, D. Sun, and M.-H. Yang, “Driv-
inggaussian: Composite gaussian splatting for surrounding dynamic au-
tonomous driving scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21 634–21 643.
[13] Y. Yan, H. Lin, C. Zhou, W. Wang, H. Sun, K. Zhan, X. Lang, X. Zhou,
and S. Peng, “Street gaussians for modeling dynamic urban scenes,”
arXiv preprint arXiv:2401.01339, 2024.
[14] U.-H. Kim, S.-H. Kim, and J.-H. Kim, “Simvodis: Simultaneous visual
odometry, object detection, and instance segmentation,” IEEE Transac-
tions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 44, no. 1, pp.
428–441, 2020.
[15] G.-P. Ji, K. Fu, Z. Wu, D.-P. Fan, J. Shen, and L. Shao, “Full-duplex
strategy for video object segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
international conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 4922–4933.
[16] F. Mumuni, A. Mumuni, and C. K. Amuzuvi, “Deep learning of
monocular depth, optical flow and ego-motion with geometric guidance
for uav navigation in dynamic environments,” Machine Learning with
Applications, vol. 10, p. 100416, 2022.
[17] Z. Yang and C. Liu, “Tupper-map: Temporal and unified panoptic
perception for 3d metric-semantic mapping,” in 2021 IEEE/RSJ Inter-
national Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE,
2021, pp. 1094–1101.
[18] ——, “Unified perception and collaborative mapping for connected and
autonomous vehicles,” IEEE Network, vol. 37, no. 4, pp. 273–281, 2023.
[19] Z. Ying, X. Yuan, B. Song, Y. Song, F. Zhou, and W. Sheng, “Accurate
and efficient 3d panoptic mapping using diverse information modalities
and multidimensional data association,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits
and Systems for Video Technology, 2023.
[20] H. Zhou, J. Shao, L. Xu, D. Bai, W. Qiu, B. Liu, Y. Wang, A. Geiger,
and Y. Liao, “Hugs: Holistic urban 3d scene understanding via gaussian
splatting,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer
Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21 336–21 345.
[21] L. Xiao, J. Wang, X. Qiu, Z. Rong, and X. Zou, “Dynamic-slam:
Semantic monocular visual localization and mapping based on deep
learning in dynamic environment,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems,
vol. 117, pp. 1–16, 2019.
[22] L. Cui and C. Ma, “Sof-slam: A semantic visual slam for dynamic
environments,” IEEE access, vol. 7, pp. 166 528–166 539, 2019.
[23] D. Kim, S. Woo, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “Video panoptic segmenta-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2020, pp. 9859–9868.
[24] S. Qiao, Y. Zhu, H. Adam, A. Yuille, and L.-C. Chen, “Vip-deeplab:
Learning visual perception with depth-aware video panoptic segmenta-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp. 3997–4008.
[25] W. Ye, X. Lan, G. Su, H. Bao, Z. Cui, and G. Zhang, “Hybrid tracker
with pixel and instance for video panoptic segmentation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2203.01217, 2022.
[26] Y. Zhou, H. Zhang, H. Lee, S. Sun, P. Li, Y. Zhu, B. Yoo, X. Qi,
and J.-J. Han, “Slot-vps: Object-centric representation learning for video
panoptic segmentation,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 3093–3103.
[27] X. Li, W. Zhang, J. Pang, K. Chen, G. Cheng, Y. Tong, and C. C. Loy,
“Video k-net: A simple, strong, and unified baseline for video segmenta-
tion,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision
and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 18 847–18 857.
[28] W. Ye, X. Lan, S. Chen, Y. Ming, X. Yu, H. Bao, Z. Cui, and G. Zhang,
“Pvo: Panoptic visual odometry,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2023, pp.
9579–9589.
[29] J. Pang, L. Qiu, X. Li, H. Chen, Q. Li, T. Darrell, and F. Yu, “Quasi-
dense similarity learning for multiple object tracking,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recognition,
2021, pp. 164–173.
[30] Q. Wang, B. Wu, P. Zhu, P. Li, W. Zuo, and Q. Hu, “Eca-net:
Efficient channel attention for deep convolutional neural networks,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2020, pp. 11 534–11 542.
[31] Z. Li, Y. Sun, L. Zhang, and J. Tang, “Ctnet: Context-based tandem
network for semantic segmentation,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern
Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 44, no. 12, pp. 9904–9917, 2021.
[32] X. Weng, Y. Yan, S. Chen, J.-H. Xue, and H. Wang, “Stage-aware feature
alignment network for real-time semantic segmentation of street scenes,”

<!-- page 14 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
14
IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems for Video Technology,
vol. 32, no. 7, pp. 4444–4459, 2021.
[33] J. Hu, L. Shen, and G. Sun, “Squeeze-and-excitation networks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2018, pp. 7132–7141.
[34] S. Woo, J. Park, J.-Y. Lee, and I. S. Kweon, “Cbam: Convolutional
block attention module,” in Proceedings of the European conference on
computer vision (ECCV), 2018, pp. 3–19.
[35] J. Engel, T. Sch¨ops, and D. Cremers, “Lsd-slam: Large-scale direct
monocular slam,” in European conference on computer vision. Springer,
2014, pp. 834–849.
[36] J. Engel, V. Koltun, and D. Cremers, “Direct sparse odometry,” IEEE
transactions on pattern analysis and machine intelligence, vol. 40, no. 3,
pp. 611–625, 2017.
[37] Z. Yuan, K. Cheng, J. Tang, and X. Yang, “Rgb-d dso: Direct sparse
odometry with rgb-d cameras for indoor scenes,” IEEE Transactions on
Multimedia, vol. 24, pp. 4092–4101, 2021.
[38] K. Tateno, F. Tombari, I. Laina, and N. Navab, “Cnn-slam: Real-time
dense monocular slam with learned depth prediction,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern recognition, 2017,
pp. 6243–6252.
[39] H. Luo, Y. Gao, Y. Wu, C. Liao, X. Yang, and K.-T. Cheng, “Real-time
dense monocular slam with online adapted depth prediction network,”
IEEE Transactions on Multimedia, vol. 21, no. 2, pp. 470–483, 2018.
[40] S. Wang, R. Clark, H. Wen, and N. Trigoni, “End-to-end, sequence-to-
sequence probabilistic visual odometry through deep neural networks,”
The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 37, no. 4-5, pp.
513–542, 2018.
[41] X. Wang, D. Maturana, S. Yang, W. Wang, Q. Chen, and S. Scherer,
“Improving learning-based ego-motion estimation with homomorphism-
based losses and drift correction,” in 2019 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS).
IEEE, 2019,
pp. 970–976.
[42] W. Wang, Y. Hu, and S. Scherer, “Tartanvo: A generalizable learning-
based vo,” in Conference on Robot Learning.
PMLR, 2021, pp. 1761–
1772.
[43] Z. Teed and J. Deng, “Droid-slam: Deep visual slam for monocular,
stereo, and rgb-d cameras,” Advances in neural information processing
systems, vol. 34, pp. 16 558–16 569, 2021.
[44] Z. Zhu, S. Peng, V. Larsson, Z. Cui, M. R. Oswald, A. Geiger, and
M. Pollefeys, “Nicer-slam: Neural implicit scene encoding for rgb slam,”
in 2024 International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV).
IEEE, 2024,
pp. 42–52.
[45] W. Xu, C. Shi, S. Tu, X. Zhou, D. Liang, and X. Bai, “A unified frame-
work for 3d scene understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.03263,
2024.
[46] B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan, M. Tancik, J. T. Barron, R. Ramamoorthi,
and R. Ng, “Nerf: Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view
synthesis,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106,
2021.
[47] W. Wu, G. Wang, T. Deng, S. Aegidius, S. Shanks, V. Modugno,
D. Kanoulas, and H. Wang, “Dvn-slam: Dynamic visual neural slam
based on local-global encoding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.11776,
2024.
[48] S. Zhu, G. Wang, H. Blum, J. Liu, L. Song, M. Pollefeys, and
H. Wang, “Sni-slam: Semantic neural implicit slam,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2024, pp. 21 167–21 177.
[49] M. Li, J. He, G. Jiang, and H. Wang, “Ddn-slam: Real-time dense
dynamic neural implicit slam with joint semantic encoding,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2401.01545, 2024.
[50] H. Zhai, G. Huang, Q. Hu, G. Li, H. Bao, and G. Zhang, “Nis-
slam: Neural implicit semantic rgb-d slam for 3d consistent scene
understanding,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2407.20853, 2024.
[51] S. Agarwal, Y. Furukawa, N. Snavely, I. Simon, B. Curless, S. M. Seitz,
and R. Szeliski, “Building rome in a day,” Communications of the ACM,
vol. 54, no. 10, pp. 105–112, 2011.
[52] M. J. Westoby, J. Brasington, N. F. Glasser, M. J. Hambrey, and
J. M. Reynolds, “‘structure-from-motion’photogrammetry: A low-cost,
effective tool for geoscience applications,” Geomorphology, vol. 179,
pp. 300–314, 2012.
[53] M. Pollefeys, D. Nist´er, J.-M. Frahm, A. Akbarzadeh, P. Mordohai,
B. Clipp, C. Engels, D. Gallup, S.-J. Kim, P. Merrell et al., “Detailed
real-time urban 3d reconstruction from video,” International Journal of
Computer Vision, vol. 78, pp. 143–167, 2008.
[54] J. L. Schonberger and J.-M. Frahm, “Structure-from-motion revisited,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern
recognition, 2016, pp. 4104–4113.
[55] Y. Furukawa, B. Curless, S. M. Seitz, and R. Szeliski, “Towards internet-
scale multi-view stereo,” in 2010 IEEE computer society conference on
computer vision and pattern recognition.
IEEE, 2010, pp. 1434–1441.
[56] M. Goesele, N. Snavely, B. Curless, H. Hoppe, and S. M. Seitz, “Multi-
view stereo for community photo collections,” in 2007 IEEE 11th
International Conference on Computer Vision.
IEEE, 2007, pp. 1–8.
[57] S. Shen, “Accurate multiple view 3d reconstruction using patch-based
stereo for large-scale scenes,” IEEE transactions on image processing,
vol. 22, no. 5, pp. 1901–1914, 2013.
[58] M. Tancik, V. Casser, X. Yan, S. Pradhan, B. Mildenhall, P. P. Srinivasan,
J. T. Barron, and H. Kretzschmar, “Block-nerf: Scalable large scene
neural view synthesis,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2022, pp. 8248–8258.
[59] R. Li, S. Fidler, A. Kanazawa, and F. Williams, “Nerf-xl: Scaling nerfs
with multiple gpus,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2404.16221, 2024.
[60] H. Turki, D. Ramanan, and M. Satyanarayanan, “Mega-nerf: Scalable
construction of large-scale nerfs for virtual fly-throughs,” in Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recogni-
tion, 2022, pp. 12 922–12 931.
[61] M. Zhenxing and D. Xu, “Switch-nerf: Learning scene decomposition
with mixture of experts for large-scale neural radiance fields,” in The
Eleventh International Conference on Learning Representations, 2022.
[62] T.-A.-Q. Nguyen, L. Rold˜ao, N. Piasco, M. Bennehar, and D. Tsishkou,
“Rodus: Robust decomposition of static and dynamic elements in urban
scenes,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.09419, 2024.
[63] K. Wu, K. Zhang, M. Gao, J. Zhao, Z. Gan, and W. Ding, “Swift-
mapping: Online neural implicit dense mapping in urban scenes,” in
Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence, vol. 38,
no. 6, 2024, pp. 6048–6056.
[64] Z. Li and J. Zhu, “Point-based neural scene rendering for street views,”
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, 2023.
[65] D. R¨uckert, L. Franke, and M. Stamminger, “Adop: Approximate dif-
ferentiable one-pixel point rendering,” ACM Transactions on Graphics
(ToG), vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1–14, 2022.
[66] K.-A. Aliev, A. Sevastopolsky, M. Kolos, D. Ulyanov, and V. Lempitsky,
“Neural point-based graphics,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th
European Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings,
Part XXII 16.
Springer, 2020, pp. 696–712.
[67] R. Rakhimov, A.-T. Ardelean, V. Lempitsky, and E. Burnaev, “Npbg++:
Accelerating neural point-based graphics,” in Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
2022, pp. 15 969–15 979.
[68] T.-Y. Lin, P. Goyal, R. Girshick, K. He, and P. Doll´ar, “Focal loss
for dense object detection,” in Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, 2017, pp. 2980–2988.
[69] F. Milletari, N. Navab, and S.-A. Ahmadi, “V-net: Fully convolutional
neural networks for volumetric medical image segmentation,” in 2016
fourth international conference on 3D vision (3DV).
Ieee, 2016, pp.
565–571.
[70] X. Wang, T. Kong, C. Shen, Y. Jiang, and L. Li, “Solo: Segmenting
objects by locations,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2020: 16th European
Conference, Glasgow, UK, August 23–28, 2020, Proceedings, Part XVIII
16.
Springer, 2020, pp. 649–665.
[71] N. Carion, F. Massa, G. Synnaeve, N. Usunier, A. Kirillov, and
S. Zagoruyko, “End-to-end object detection with transformers,” in
European conference on computer vision.
Springer, 2020, pp. 213–
229.
[72] S.-J. Cho, S.-W. Ji, J.-P. Hong, S.-W. Jung, and S.-J. Ko, “Rethinking
coarse-to-fine approach in single image deblurring,” in Proceedings of
the IEEE/CVF international conference on computer vision, 2021, pp.
4641–4650.
[73] A. Shapiro, “Monte carlo sampling methods,” Handbooks in operations
research and management science, vol. 10, pp. 353–425, 2003.
[74] J. Johnson, A. Alahi, and L. Fei-Fei, “Perceptual losses for real-time
style transfer and super-resolution,” in Computer Vision–ECCV 2016:
14th European Conference, Amsterdam, The Netherlands, October 11-
14, 2016, Proceedings, Part II 14.
Springer, 2016, pp. 694–711.
[75] Y. Cabon, N. Murray, and M. Humenberger, “Virtual kitti 2,” arXiv
preprint arXiv:2001.10773, 2020.
[76] S. R. Richter, Z. Hayder, and V. Koltun, “Playing for benchmarks,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE international conference on computer vision,
2017, pp. 2213–2222.

<!-- page 15 -->
JOURNAL OF LATEX CLASS FILES, VOL. 14, NO. 8, AUGUST 2025
15
[77] A. Geiger, P. Lenz, C. Stiller, and R. Urtasun, “Vision meets robotics:
The kitti dataset,” The International Journal of Robotics Research,
vol. 32, no. 11, pp. 1231–1237, 2013.
[78] L. Yang, B. Kang, Z. Huang, X. Xu, J. Feng, and H. Zhao, “Depth
anything: Unleashing the power of large-scale unlabeled data,” in
Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and
Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 10 371–10 381.
[79] I. Ballester, A. Font´an, J. Civera, K. H. Strobl, and R. Triebel, “Dot:
Dynamic object tracking for visual slam,” in 2021 IEEE international
conference on robotics and automation (ICRA).
IEEE, 2021, pp.
11 705–11 711.
[80] S. Shen, Y. Cai, W. Wang, and S. Scherer, “Dytanvo: Joint refinement
of visual odometry and motion segmentation in dynamic environments,”
in 2023 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation
(ICRA).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 4048–4055.
[81] B. Bescos, J. M. F´acil, J. Civera, and J. Neira, “Dynaslam: Tracking,
mapping, and inpainting in dynamic scenes,” IEEE robotics and automa-
tion letters, vol. 3, no. 4, pp. 4076–4083, 2018.
[82] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodr´ıguez, J. M. Montiel, and J. D.
Tard´os, “Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–
inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE transactions on robotics, vol. 37,
no. 6, pp. 1874–1890, 2021.
[83] H. M. S. Bruno and E. L. Colombini, “Lift-slam: A deep-learning
feature-based monocular visual slam method,” Neurocomputing, vol.
455, pp. 97–110, 2021.
[84] W. Ye, X. Yu, X. Lan, Y. Ming, J. Li, H. Bao, Z. Cui, and G. Zhang,
“Deflowslam: Self-supervised scene motion decomposition for dynamic
dense slam,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2207.08794, vol. 2, 2022.
[85] E. Sucar, S. Liu, J. Ortiz, and A. J. Davison, “imap: Implicit mapping and
positioning in real-time,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF international
conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 6229–6238.
[86] Z. Zhu, S. Peng, V. Larsson, W. Xu, H. Bao, Z. Cui, M. R. Oswald, and
M. Pollefeys, “Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam,”
in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and
pattern recognition, 2022, pp. 12 786–12 796.
[87] J. T. Barron, B. Mildenhall, M. Tancik, P. Hedman, R. Martin-Brualla,
and P. P. Srinivasan, “Mip-nerf: A multiscale representation for anti-
aliasing neural radiance fields,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF inter-
national conference on computer vision, 2021, pp. 5855–5864.
[88] T. M¨uller, A. Evans, C. Schied, and A. Keller, “Instant neural graphics
primitives with a multiresolution hash encoding,” ACM transactions on
graphics (TOG), vol. 41, no. 4, pp. 1–15, 2022.
[89] N. Keetha, J. Karhade, K. M. Jatavallabhula, G. Yang, S. Scherer,
D. Ramanan, and J. Luiten, “Splatam: Splat track & map 3d gaussians
for dense rgb-d slam,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2024, pp. 21 357–21 366.
[90] J. Ost, F. Mannan, N. Thuerey, J. Knodt, and F. Heide, “Neural
scene graphs for dynamic scenes,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp.
2856–2865.
[91] D. Ouyang, S. He, G. Zhang, M. Luo, H. Guo, J. Zhan, and Z. Huang,
“Efficient multi-scale attention module with cross-spatial learning,” in
ICASSP 2023-2023 IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, Speech
and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
IEEE, 2023, pp. 1–5.
VI. BIOGRAPHY SECTION
Zhiliu Yang received his Ph.D. in Electrical and
Computer Engineering from Clarkson University,
Potsdam, New York, USA, in 2021. Currently he is
an assistant professor in the School of Information
Science and Engineering at Yunnan University, Kun-
ming, China. He was a recipient of Young Talents
Award of Xing Dian Program of Yunnan Province,
China. His current research interest is in machine
vision, embodied AI, scene mapping and generation,
dynamic scene understanding, and unified modeling
for multi-task learning.
Jinyu Dai received his B.E. degree in Commu-
nication Engineering from Kunming University of
Science and Technology (KUST), Kunming, China,
in 2022. He is currently working toward the M.S.
degree with the School of Information Science and
Engineering, Yunnan University, Kunming, China.
His research interests include visual perception and
scene reconstruction.
Jianyuan Zhang received his B.E. degree in Elec-
tronics Science and Technology from the Yunnan
University, Kunming, China, in 2020. He is currently
working toward the M.S. degree with the School
of Information Science and Engineering, Yunnan
University, Kunming, China. His research interests
include visual perception, LiDAR odometry and
implicit scene reconstruction.
Zhu Yang received his Ph.D. degree from Beijing
Institute of Technology in 2019. Currently, he is
an assistant professor in the School of Information
and Electronics, Beijing Institute of Technology.
His research interests are chip design and signal
processing related to intelligent remote sensing.
