<!-- page 1 -->
TRGS-SLAM: IMU-Aided Gaussian Splatting SLAM for Blurry, Rolling Shutter,
and Noisy Thermal Images
Spencer Carmichael†, Katherine A. Skinner
University of Michigan, Ann Arbor, MI USA
{specarmi,kskin}@umich.edu
Abstract
Thermal cameras offer several advantages for simultane-
ous localization and mapping (SLAM) with mobile robots:
they provide a passive, low-power solution to operating in
darkness, are invariant to rapidly changing or high dynamic
range illumination, and can see through fog, dust, and smoke.
However, uncooled microbolometer thermal cameras, the
only practical option in most robotics applications, suffer
from significant motion blur, rolling shutter distortions, and
fixed pattern noise. In this paper, we present TRGS-SLAM,
a 3D Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) based thermal inertial
SLAM system uniquely capable of handling these degra-
dations. To overcome the challenges of thermal data, we
introduce a model-aware 3DGS rendering method and sev-
eral general innovations to 3DGS SLAM, including B-spline
trajectory optimization with a two-stage IMU loss, view-
diversity-based opacity resetting, and pose drift correction
schemes. Our system demonstrates accurate tracking on
real-world, fast motion, and high-noise thermal data that
causes all other tested SLAM methods to fail. Moreover,
through offline refinement of our SLAM results, we demon-
strate thermal image restoration competitive with prior work
that required ground truth poses. The code is available at:
https://umautobots.github.io/trgs_slam.
1. Introduction
The capability of thermal cameras to operate under ad-
verse illumination and see through visual obscurants opens
new applications for simultaneous localization and mapping
(SLAM) frameworks for mobile robots. A highly motivat-
ing example is a thermal camera-equipped robot mapping a
dangerous environment, bringing valuable situational aware-
ness to rescue workers [48]. Given the low weight, power
consumption, and price of uncooled microbolometer ther-
mal cameras (relative to their cooled counterparts [13, 57]),
they are the likely choice in this scenario. However, these
†Corresponding author.
Figure 1.
The main elements of TRGS-SLAM. Left:
Microbolometer-aware rendering. Right: 3DGS map and B-spline
trajectory.
cameras pose challenges for SLAM. Under slow motion, the
low contrast and fixed pattern noise (FPN) of the images are
the main issues, and these topics have been well addressed
[8, 17, 23, 26, 38, 53, 56, 61]. However, in some scenarios,
including the search and rescue context, aggressive camera
motion may be necessary. In this case, the images are fur-
ther afflicted by motion blur and rolling shutter distortions,
problems that are seldom addressed in prior work on thermal
SLAM.
Recent work, TRNeRF, has demonstrated that given
ground truth poses, thermal images with significant FPN, mo-
tion blur, and rolling shutter distortions can be restored [7].
This is accomplished by modeling microbolometer degra-
dations within the rendering pipeline of a Neural Radiance
Field (NeRF) [32]. Concurrently, in the visual domain, re-
lated techniques on motion deblurring with NeRF and 3D
Gaussian Splatting (3DGS) [9, 25, 51, 60] have been incor-
porated in online SLAM systems [1, 14, 52].
arXiv:2603.20443v1  [cs.RO]  20 Mar 2026

<!-- page 2 -->
In this paper, we extend the ideas of TRNeRF into an on-
line 3DGS SLAM system (Fig. 1). This requires significant
innovation, as the frontend tracking systems and monoc-
ular depth networks relied on by many NeRF and 3DGS
SLAM systems are unreliable under the degradations we
seek to overcome. Instead, we utilize a B-spline trajectory
and tightly fuse with an IMU to estimate and constrain the
continuous poses needed to model blur and rolling shutter.
We also introduce other general ideas to 3DGS SLAM, in-
cluding new techniques for opacity resetting and pose drift
correction. We demonstrate, with a thorough benchmark on
the TRNeRF dataset, that our method is uniquely capable
of accurate tracking under severe thermal degradations. In
addition, through offline refinement of our SLAM results,
we achieve restoration performance comparable to TRNeRF,
which utilizes ground truth poses from stereo visual structure
from motion.
In summary, our main contributions are as follows:
• A thermal inertial SLAM system, with a 3DGS map and
continuous time B-spline trajectory, uniquely capable of
accurate tracking under severe image degradation.
• Novel 3DGS SLAM methods, including microbolometer-
aware rendering, a two-stage direct IMU loss, view-
diversity-based opacity resetting, and pose drift correction
schemes.
• A system for offline refinement of the SLAM results that
enables thermal image restoration competitive with prior
work, but without the need for ground truth poses.
2. Related Work
Thermal SLAM
Existing work on thermal SLAM has
primarily focused on the low contrast and high noise of-
ten present in thermal imagery. Significant effort has been
made to identify features robust to these issues: handcrafted
features have been exhaustively benchmarked [33, 48, 49],
learned features have been trained with FPN-based data aug-
mentation [26, 61], and edge- [8, 17, 53] or line- [23] based
features have been investigated. Rather than relying on data
association that is invariant to noise, some approaches ex-
plicitly estimate and remove FPN online [8, 17, 38, 56].
However, [8] and [17] rely on a bilateral filter to isolate FPN,
ignoring its spatially smooth component, while [38] and
[56] use the method in [10], which requires pixel correspon-
dences that may be hard to obtain prior to the noise removal
(a chicken-and-egg problem, as the authors acknowledge
[10]). The method in [10] also estimates FPN only at sparse
pixels, interpolating the rest. Our method fits in this latter
category, but estimates FPN densely without spatial filtering
or correspondences.
It is important to note that thermal cameras also have
built-in methods of mitigating FPN. However, shutter-based
non-uniformity corrections (NUCs) pose a risk to tracking
by pausing the image stream [5], and onboard noise filtering
introduces black-box multi-view inconsistency [7]. To our
knowledge, we are the first to investigate this latter issue
in SLAM, revealing that onboard filters (often enabled by
default) can be very harmful in low contrast scenes.
Despite the susceptibility of microbolometers to motion
blur and rolling shutter distortions, these topics have been
rarely covered in the thermal SLAM context. While several
thermal SLAM papers [11, 12, 20, 21, 36] have applied or
built upon ROVIO [3, 4], a blur-robust visual-inertial odom-
etry method, we believe our method is the first to integrate
the unique microbolometer model of motion blur. Moreover,
to our knowledge, ours is the first thermal SLAM method to
consider rolling shutter distortions.
NeRF & 3DGS Restoration
NeRF [32] and 3DGS [18]
have proven highly effective methods for novel view synthe-
sis and 3D reconstruction. While each originally assumed
sharp, global shutter inputs, it has since been demonstrated
that accurate NeRF and 3DGS scenes can be trained de-
spite motion blur [9, 25, 51, 60], rolling shutter distortions
[27, 55], or a combination of these degradations [7, 41]. In
particular, TRNeRF restores highly degraded thermal im-
ages by modeling the microbolometer in the NeRF rendering
pipeline [7]. We translate this idea into 3DGS, improving
efficiency, and extend the FPN parameterization. More im-
portantly, we eliminate TRNeRF’s requirement for ground
truth poses by integrating these concepts into a SLAM sys-
tem.
NeRF & 3DGS SLAM
Initially parallel to the work on
restoration, NeRF [32] and 3DGS [18] have been increas-
ingly used as dense, high fidelity map representations in
SLAM [47].
NeRF and 3DGS SLAM methods can be
broadly categorized as frame-to-frame or frame-to-model
[47]. Frame-to-frame methods typically employ existing
SLAM methods (e.g., ORB-SLAM3 [6] or DROID-SLAM
[46]) as frontends, optimizing the NeRF or 3DGS map in
the backend. Frame-to-model methods utilize the NeRF or
3DGS map across the entire system, performing tracking di-
rectly against the map. As our benchmark suggests (Sec. 4.3),
existing frame-to-frame tracking methods struggle with
the degradations we target, pointing to the frame-to-model
strategy as more promising. Monocular(-inertial) frame-to-
model approaches are much fewer in number. Among them,
MonoGS [31] stands out from other methods [30, 44, 64]
that rely on monocular depth networks (unreliable with de-
graded thermal images). We therefore draw the most inspi-
ration from MonoGS [31], especially in map initialization,
keyframe selection, and Gaussian creation, while also sub-
stantially expanding upon it and developing our system from
scratch around a different rasterizer (gsplat [58]).
Recently, the lines of research on restoration and SLAM
have intersected in multiple papers on blur-aware NeRF-

<!-- page 3 -->
Figure 2. TRGS-SLAM system diagram
and 3DGS-based visual SLAM [1, 14, 52]. However, none
fuse with an IMU or utilize a B-spline trajectory, and the
monocular demonstrations rely on frame-to-frame tracking
[1, 14] and monocular depth estimates [14]. There are also
several NeRF and 3DGS SLAM papers that share elements
with our system, but do not leverage them to the same extent.
TS-SLAM [16] is an RGB-D method that jointly optimizes a
B-spline trajectory together with a NeRF map, but uses a dy-
namics prior rather than fusing with an IMU. [56] proposes
a thermal monocular NeRF SLAM method that, like ours,
estimates FPN, but does so through pixel correspondences
(as noted above). Moreover, it relies on a visual SLAM
frontend, DSM [65], that is not blur or rolling shutter-aware.
Finally, existing monocular-inertial methods limit the direct
influence of the IMU to their frontends [2, 28, 54] or, more
narrowly, to initializing the camera pose in tracking [44].
In contrast, we use an IMU loss directly in optimizing the
3DGS map, pivotally including gyroscope data from the
beginning.
B-Splines in Rolling Shutter SLAM
We draw inspiration
from many rolling shutter-aware SLAM methods that have
demonstrated the utility of continuous B-spline trajectories
[19, 22, 24, 29, 37]. As originally observed in [29], this
representation naturally supports estimation of the range
of poses contributing to each rolling shutter frame, while
also enabling residuals to be computed directly against IMU
measurements (without need for IMU (pre-)integration). To
support our SLAM method and future work, we contribute
a stand-alone package for efficient, on-manifold, B-spline
trajectory optimization with Pytorch (detailed in Sec. A1).
3. Method
Figure 2 presents a high level overview of TRGS-SLAM,
highlighting the data and parameters flowing in and out of
1Supplementary material elements are referred to only by their alphanu-
meric section labels for brevity
tracking (Sec. 3.5) and mapping (Sec. 3.6). The B-spline
and IMU loss (Sec. 3.2) are used throughout the system,
as are the 3DGS map and microbolometer-aware rendering
method (Sec. 3.3). These components involve the learned
IMU biases and FPN, respectively.
3.1. Preliminary: Microbolometer Image Model
In a raw microbolometer thermal image, the value of pixel
(xp, yp) at time t can be given by [7]:
˜n′
xp,yp(t) = ˜m′
xp,yp(t) + ˜o′
xp,yp(t)
(1)
˜m′
xp,yp(t) = 1
τ
Z t
−∞
exp
s −t
τ

˜p′
xp,yp(s)ds
(2)
Equation (2) describes the distinct model of motion blur in
microbolometers, producing blurry pixel value ˜m′
xp,yp(t).
˜p′
xp,yp(t) is a value directly proportional to the power in-
cident on pixel (xp, yp) at time t and τ is the camera’s
thermal time constant. Equation (1) gives the final pixel
value ˜n′
xp,yp(t), modeling slowly varying FPN as a pixel-
wise offset ˜o′
xp,yp(t). The prime symbol denotes that these
are quantities relating to a lens-distorted image and the tilde
denotes that these are measured quantities. Additionally, mi-
crobolometers employ a rolling shutter readout such that the
value of pixel (xp, yp) in image l is obtained by evaluating
Eq. (1) at time t′
xp,yp,l [7]:
t′
xp,yp,l = t′
0,0,l + xp∆tpix + ypw∆tpix
(3)
where t′
0,0,l is the time the top left pixel (0, 0) is read out,
∆tpix is the readout delay between each pixel, and w is the
width of the image. We refer readers to [7] for more detail.
3.2. B-Spline Trajectory & IMU Loss
We represent the continuous-time trajectory with two uni-
form B-splines, one for position p(t) ∈R3 and one for
rotation R(t) ∈SO(3) (as defined in Sec. A.1). The B-
splines’ values are determined by control points, pi and Ri,
knots, ti, and the spline order, k. The value of a B-spline at
any time t is influenced by k active control points and the
trajectory is estimated through their optimization.
The relative scale trajectory of the camera in the world
frame will be denoted as ¯TW
C (t), where the bar indicates
the relative scale. Prior to IMU initialization (Sec. 3.7), the
position and rotation splines represent this trajectory directly:
¯TW
C (t) = [RW
C (t), ¯pW
C (t)]. After IMU initialization, the
position and rotation splines represent the absolute scale
trajectory of the IMU, TW
I (t) = [RW
I (t), pW
I (t)], and ¯TW
C (t)
is evaluated using the calibrated IMU extrinsics TI
C(t) =
[RI
C, pI
C] and estimated scale factor S:
¯TW
C (t) = [ RW
I (t)RI
C , 1
S
 RW
I (t)pI
C + pW
I (t)

]
(4)

<!-- page 4 -->
Figure 3. Microbolometer-aware rendering process. A sum of multiple rasters, each multiplied with precomputed pixel-wise weights, is
combined with a learned FPN estimate to obtain an approximation of the degraded input image.
B-splines have closed form derivatives and are Ck−2
continuous (see Sec. A.2 for details). Therefore, k >= 4
ensures continuous acceleration and enables direct compar-
isons between derivatives of the estimated trajectory and
IMU measurements. Prior to IMU initialization, we com-
pute a residual rg,m against gyroscope measurement ˜ωI
I,m
taken at time tm as:
rg,m = RI
CωC
C(tm) −(˜ωI
I,m −bg)
(5)
where ωC
C(t) is the estimated angular velocity and bg is the
gyroscope bias. After IMU initialization, we compute a
gyroscope rg,m and accelerometer ra,m residual as:
rg,m = ωI
I(tm) −(˜ωI
I,m −bg)
ra,m = aW
I (tm) −
 RW
I (tm)(˜aI
I,m −ba) + GˆgW
(6)
where ωI
I(t), aW
I (t), and RW
I (t) are the estimated angular ve-
locity, linear acceleration, and rotation, ˜aI
I,m is an accelerom-
eter measurement taken at time tm, ba is the accelerometer
bias, ˆgW is the direction of gravity in the world frame (as a
unit vector), and G is the magnitude of gravity. Note that
bg and ba are learned parameters, while ˆgW is held constant
outside of periodic updates (Sec. 3.7).
Given a set of IMU measurements I we compute an IMU-
based loss LIMU,I as follows:
LIMU,I =
X
m∈I
λg ∥rg,m∥2 + λa ∥ra,m∥2
(7)
where λg and λa are scalar coefficients. Note that the terms
involving the accelerometer are excluded prior to IMU ini-
tialization. Additionally, we compute a loss from the learned
biases using another set coefficient λbias:
Lbias = λbias
 ∥bg∥2 + ∥ba∥2

(8)
to prevent overfitting with outlier residuals.
3.3. 3DGS Map & Microbolometer-Aware
Rendering
We represent the map as a set of 3D Gaussians G, each de-
fined by a scalar opacity σg and intensity cg, and a relative
scale 3D covariance ellipsoid parameterized by a mean ¯µg,
scale ¯sg, and quaternion qg in the world frame. In the orig-
inal 3DGS method [18], spherical harmonics are used to
represent view-dependent color. Here, we assume no view
dependency to reduce the number of learnable parameters,
and we require only a scalar intensity as thermal images are
single-channel.
In 3DGS [18], images are rasterized by splatting (pro-
jecting) the 3D Gaussians onto the 2D image plane and
computing a pixel value p as:
p =
X
g∈B
cgαg
g−1
Y
j=1
(1 −αj)
(9)
where B is a depth-ordered subset of Gaussians visible to
the pixel and αg is obtained by multiplying the Gaussian’s
opacity σg by the Gaussian’s 2D distribution evaluated at the
pixel coordinate. The primary inputs to the 3DGS method
are a set of sharp, global shutter images {˜I′
l}Nimg−1
l=0
and
corresponding camera pose estimates { ¯TW
C,l}Nimg−1
l=0
. The 3D
to 2D projection assumes an ideal pinhole camera model,
so lens undistortion is applied to the input images to obtain
{˜Il}Nimg−1
l=0
. In training, the loss is computed by rasterizing
an image IG,l at pose ¯TW
C,l and directly comparing it to ˜Il.
To adapt this to degraded thermal images, we extend the
rendering pipeline to rasterize multiple images, blend them
together, and sum the result with learned FPN.
Let [ ˜Nl]yp,xp
=
˜nxp,yp(txp,yp,l) denote a raw mi-
crobolometer image after downsampling and lens undis-
tortion. We show in Sec. B that ˜nxp,yp(txp,yp,l) approx-
imately follows the form of Eq. (1) at an effective read-
out time txp,yp,l. To render an estimate of ˜Nl, we begin
by computing [Ml]yp,xp = mxp,yp(txp,yp,l). To do this,
we rasterize Nr images at times {tr}Nr−1
r=0
evenly spaced
over [tmax,l −Tb, tmax,l], where tmax,l is the latest effec-
tive readout time across ˜Nl, and Tb is the maximum in-
tegration interval. This rasterization involves evaluating
the position and rotation splines at each time to obtain
{¯TW
C (tr)}Nr−1
r=0 . Treating the pixel values of the rasterized
images {IG(tr)}Nr−1
r=0
as samples {pxp,yp(tr)}Nr−1
r=0 , we can
compute mxp,yp(txp,yp,l) as a discrete integral in the form

<!-- page 5 -->
of Eq. (2). Ultimately, as detailed in Sec. C, the computa-
tion of Ml can be efficiently cast as a sum of element-wise
products:
Ml =
Nr−1
X
r=0
IG(tr) ⊙Wr
(10)
where {Wr}Nr−1
r=0
are precomputed weights that are a func-
tion of Nr, Tb, τ, ∆tpix, and the lens undistortion maps.
To model the slowly time varying FPN, we use two
splines: Opix(t) ∈Rh×w and oglobal(t) ∈R, where w and h
are the image width and height, respectively. Opix(t) models
pixel-wise FPN and, similar to TRNeRF [7], we use the
following loss to encourage Opix(t) to be zero-mean:
LFPN(t) = λFPN
wh

w−1
X
xp=0
h−1
X
yp=0
[Opix(t)]yp,xp

(11)
where λFPN is a set coefficient. As Opix(t) is zero-mean, we
use oglobal(t) to separately account for global (image-wide)
intensity changes. Both of these splines are constructed
similarly to the position spline (see Sec. A.1). The control
points of Opix(t) are stored as vectors in Rwh and the result
of evaluating the spline is reshaped. Note that the spline knot
intervals can be used to independently control how slowly
these FPN components vary.
Putting these parts together, the final render for image Nl
is computed as follows:
Nl = Ml + Opix(t′
0,0,l) + oglobal(t′
0,0,l)
(12)
The process is visualized in Fig. 3. We define the loss for
image l as the mean absolute error between the rendered
image and the undistorted image:
Limg,l =
1
wh∥Nl −˜Nl∥1
(13)
3.4. System Initialization
The position and rotation splines are initialized with all con-
trol points set to zero and identity, respectively (i.e., the
initial camera frame defines the world frame). All control
points of both FPN splines are also initialized to zero. The
map is initialized as a plane of Ninit Gaussians one unit (un-
scaled) in front of the camera. This is done by randomly
sampling Ninit pixels across the first image. The Gaussian
means are initialized by back projecting the pixels with a
depth of 1 and the pixel values are used to set the intensities.
The opacities are set to a default value, the quaternions are
randomized, and the scale of each Gaussian is set to the
average distance of its three nearest neighbors. The Gaus-
sians are subsequently fit to the first image through Niter,init
iterations of optimization with the following loss:
Linit =
1
wh∥IG(t′
0,0,0) −˜N0∥1
(14)
Note that at this stage only the Gaussians are optimized and
blur and rolling shutter are not yet modeled. For stability,
blur and rolling shutter are not modeled until after a set
number of initial keyframes.
3.5. Tracking
After initialization, tracking is applied to each new image.
B-Spline Extension
The splines can be evaluated for
t ∈[t0, t0 +(Nc −k+1)∆tc), where Nc is the total number
of control points and ∆tc is the knot interval. When a new
image l arrives, control points must be added to extend the
splines to the end of readout tmax,l prior to tracking optimiza-
tion. In the early stages of our system, this is done by simply
duplicating the last control point of each spline. After a set
number of keyframes, we additionally compute Nq predicted
poses at times {tq}Nq−1
q=0
evenly spaced over [t′
0,0,l−1, tmax,l]
and fit the active set of control points to these predictions.
Prior to IMU initialization, predictions are made assuming
constant velocity; after IMU initialization, predictions are
made through IMU integration. Further details on this pro-
cess are provided in Sec. A.5. The FPN splines, Opix(t)
and oglobal(t), must also be extended occasionally. When
necessary, we extend the FPN splines by duplicating their
last control points, without fitting them to any predictions.
Tracking Optimization
In tracking we optimize the posi-
tion and rotation control points only. All other parameters
are frozen. Optimization is performed for a maximum of
Niter,track iterations with the following loss:
Ltrack =
1
|Itrack|LIMU,Itrack + Limg,l
(15)
where Itrack is the set of IMU measurements taken over
[min(t0,0,l−1, tmax,l −Tb), tmax,l]. Optimization is consid-
ered converged if the average change in both the positions
and rotations across the raster timestamps falls below set
thresholds.
Keyframe Selection & Window Management
After
tracking optimization, we follow MonoGS [31] and select
the current image as a keyframe if it satisfies one of two
conditions: the translation since the last keyframe (normal-
ized by the relative scale median depth) exceeds a threshold,
or the intersection over union between the currently visible
Gaussians and those visible to the last keyframe falls beneath
a threshold. Unlike MonoGS, our keyframe window is de-
fined simply as the last Nwindow keyframes. We have found
that the random keyframe sampling in mapping is sufficient
to provide wide-baseline multi-view constraints.
3.6. Mapping
When a new keyframe is selected, mapping is applied.

<!-- page 6 -->
Gaussian Creation
Prior to mapping optimization, new
Gaussians are created by randomly sampling and back pro-
jecting pixels in the new keyframe, as done with the first
image in Sec. 3.4. However, in this case, the depth of new
Gaussians is set to the relative scale median depth in the new
keyframe, and the sampling is restricted to pixels with an ac-
cumulated alpha value beneath a set threshold (where the ac-
cumulated alpha value is given by Eq. (9) with cg removed).
The number of new Gaussians is set as Nmax Ncand/(wh)
where Nmax is a set parameter and Ncand is the number of
candidate pixels (as determined by the alpha threshold). This
avoids creating new Gaussians in previously mapped areas.
Mapping Optimization
In mapping we jointly optimize
all learned parameters: the IMU biases, the Gaussians, and
the position, rotation, and FPN control points. Optimization
is performed for Niter,map iterations with the following loss:
Lmap =
1
|Imap| (λwLIMU,WI + λsLIMU,SI) + Lbias+
1
|K|
 
λw
X
l∈WK
Limg,l + λs
X
l∈SK
Limg,l +
X
l∈K
LFPN(t′
0,0,l)
!
(16)
where WK is the set of all keyframes in the current window,
SK is a set of past keyframes randomly sampled at each
iteration, and K = WK ∪SK. WI and SI are disjoint
sets of IMU measurements associated with WK and SK,
and Imap = WI ∪SI. The coefficients λw and λs balance
the influence of the keyframe window relative to the past
keyframes. Without these coefficients, we observed that pose
drift was not consistently corrected. Rather, the keyframe
window frequently overwrote previously observed portions
of the map. We address this by setting λs > λw to give
more weight to the past keyframes. The coefficients are
applied to both the image and the IMU losses to maintain
balance between them. Additionally, we manually modify
the gradients of the trajectory control points and Gaussians
to compensate for this weighting scheme. The full details
are given in Sec. D.
View-Diversity-Based Opacity Resetting
The original
3DGS paper [18] introduces several rules that are periodi-
cally applied to split, duplicate, prune, and reset Gaussians.
These rules serve to populate empty areas and reconstruct
detail. One such rule, intended to reduce the number of
Gaussians, is to periodically reset the Gaussian opacities to
a low value. In combination with a rule to prune low opacity
Gaussians, this allows subsequent optimization to recover
necessary Gaussians only and cull the rest. However, this
global resetting is inefficient and destabilizing in the SLAM
context. Therefore, we limit this resetting to Gaussians with
poor view diversity. Specifically, at each mapping iteration
Figure 4. A depiction of the Gaussians targeted by our view-
diversity-based opacity resetting. The color scale is mapped to
the log of the condition number of Vg for each Gaussian.
we compute the following for each Gaussian g:
Vg = Vg,prev +
X
r∈Rg
ˆdr,gˆdT
r,g
(17)
where Vg,prev is the result from the previous iteration, Rg
is the subset of rasters the Gaussian appears in, and ˆdr,g is
the unit vector pointing from the camera center at raster r to
the Gaussian mean ¯µg. Vg is therefore the second moment
matrix of these view directions, accumulated over many
mapping iterations. When it comes time to reset opacities,
we compute the condition number of each Vg and reset
Gaussians with a condition number above a set threshold.
Vg is then reset to 0. As shown in Fig. 4, this tends to
eliminate poorly constrained Gaussians at the edges of the
scene.
We maintain the remaining rules for splitting, duplicating,
and pruning. However, as detailed in Sec. E, the gradient
accumulation involved in these rules must be modified to
accommodate our microbolometer-aware rendering. When
the rules are applied, the mapping iteration counter is reset
to ensure the map is stable before tracking resumes.
Relocalization
When the current keyframe image l ob-
serves a new area, mapping is largely unconstrained and con-
sistently results in a high SSIM value between the noise-free
render Ml and denoised input image ˜Nl −Opix(t′
0,0,l) −
oglobal(t′
0,0,l). The SSIM is also high when the camera is
accurately localized in a pre-existing portion of the map.
However, given that the weighting scheme in Eq. (16) pre-
vents overwriting, mapping can fail to fit the Gaussians to
the current keyframe image when a part of the scene is re-
observed after significant drift. Therefore, low SSIM signals

<!-- page 7 -->
tracking failure. We implement a simple scheme to recover
from tracking failure. When the SSIM is below a set thresh-
old after mapping, we revert the full system state to before
mapping and resume tracking. This effectively pauses map-
ping until tracking is able to relocalize. During this phase,
we reduce the IMU residual coefficients, λg and λa, to allow
pose optimization to temporarily ignore dynamics and jump
to the correct solution.
3.7. IMU Initialization & Updates
IMU initialization solves for the unknown gravity direction
ˆg and scale factor S needed to compute a loss against the
accelerometer. It also produces an estimate of the gyroscope
and accelerometer biases, bg and ba. After a set period,
we perform IMU initialization as described in [66] using
keyframe poses sampled at a set rate and all IMU measure-
ments. Using the estimated scale factor, we transform the tra-
jectory to the IMU frame with absolute scale. To smooth the
trajectory, we run mapping optimization for set number of it-
erations with two changes: we use all IMU measurements at
each iteration and all keyframes are randomly sampled. As
the initial scale estimate can be poor, we periodically rerun
the method in [66] to update the scale and gravity direction.
Full details on the application of scale updates are provided
in Sec. F.
3.8. Offline Refinement
We perform offline refinement of the SLAM results by run-
ning a set number of additional mapping iterations using all
IMU data at each iteration and randomly sampling from all
frames (not just keyframes). In this process, we operate on
the full resolution images, increase the number of rasters
per render, introduce the gravity direction unit vector as an
additional learned parameter, drop the IMU bias loss, and
re-introduce global opacity resetting.
4. Experiments
4.1. Dataset
We evaluate our method’s SLAM and restoration perfor-
mance on the TRNeRF dataset [7]. This dataset includes six
sequences combining three camera speeds (slow, medium,
and fast) with two scenes (indoor and outdoor). We refer to
these sequences by the first letter of the speed and scene (e.g.,
SO denotes slow outdoor). These combinations allow for an
isolation of variables: blur and rolling shutter are insignifi-
cant in the slow sequences, and FPN is most prominent in
the low contrast indoor scene. See Sec. G for further details.
4.2. Implementation
We build TRGS-SLAM in PyTorch. For simplicity, the
system uses a single process (tracking waits for mapping).
We use the gsplat 3DGS library [58] to benefit from its
Figure 5. TRGS-SLAM result on the medium indoor sequence.
Table 1. RMSE ATE in cm on the TRNeRF dataset.
Type
Method
SO
MO
FO
SI
MI
FI
Monocular
ORB-SLAM3
0.8
9.4
×
×
×
×
DSM
9.4
×
×
76.7
×
×
DROID-SLAM
0.5
2.6
×
0.7
×
×
MASt3R-SLAM*
1.6
94.5
×
2.7
88.4
×
MonoGS
7.7
×
×
83.9
×
×
Mono-Inertial
ORB-SLAM3 (inertial)
1.1
×
×
×
×
×
DM-VIO
1.5
44.2
×
25.2
×
×
DBA-VIO
1.4
25.2
×
2.5
26.5
×
ROTIO
18.5
53.2
×
37.1
×
×
TRGS-SLAM
12.7
5.5
2.4
6.4
3.9
4.2
* RMSE ATE and alignment performed with keyframes only.
× program exited early or error exceeded 1 meter.
efficient batched rasterization, camera pose gradients, and
implementation of anti-aliasing [59]. We reimplement the
IMU initialization method of [66] in Python. We introduce a
standalone package for B-spline optimization that uses the
algorithms introduced in [42], and the software libraries Py-
Pose [50] and LieTorch [45], to achieve efficient and stable
on-manifold optimization (detailed in Sec. A). As performed
in [7], we rescale the 16-bit thermal images into the [0, 1]
range using predefined thresholds. Here, we use the 0.5
and 99.5 percentiles of the pixel values observed in each
sequence. We otherwise run TRGS-SLAM with the same
parameters across all sequences, detailed fully in Sec. H.
4.3. SLAM Evaluation
We compare TRGS-SLAM against a variety of visual and
thermal SLAM methods. To make the case for the frame-
to-model paradigm, we test several methods used as fron-
tends in frame-to-frame systems: ORB-SLAM3 [6], DROID-
SLAM [46], DSM [65], and DBA-VIO [62] (an inertial
extension of DROID-SLAM). We also include the frame-to-
model system MonoGS [31], the direct visual inertial method
DM-VIO [43], and the paradigm-shifting MASt3R-SLAM
[34] (based on two-view reconstruction priors). Although
few thermal SLAM methods are publicly available, we are

<!-- page 8 -->
Figure 6. Qualitative restoration results. With offline refinement, TRGS-SLAM achieves restoration quality near that of TRNeRF.
able to test ROTIO [20] (using the implementation of [12]),
a 16-bit adaptation of ROVIO [3, 4]. With the exception of
ROTIO, we rescale the input images with the same thresh-
olds used in our method (and convert to 8-bit), but run on the
full resolution images (barring standard resizing procedures
[34, 46, 62]). For each sequence, we report the average
RMSE ATE across three trials, using Sim(3) alignment in
the pure monocular case and SE(3) alignment otherwise (us-
ing [15]). Unless otherwise noted, the alignment and RMSE
ATE calculation are performed using all frames.
Table 1 gives the results. In the SO sequence, where
degradation is nearly absent, TRGS-SLAM is outperformed
by multiple baselines. In part, this is due to scale error (our
result is 4.7 cm with Sim(3) alignment). The slow motion
makes IMU initialization difficult, though the performance
of other inertial methods suggests this aspect of our system
could be improved. The value of our method is apparent in
the remaining sequences. While some baselines demonstrate
impressive robustness under moderate degradation (MO and
SI), ours is the only method capable of accurate tracking in
the most challenging sequences (FO, MI, and FI). Our result
on the MI sequence is shown in Fig. 5.
A thorough ablation study is presented in Sec. I. The
results confirm that to obtain good performance on all se-
quences it is necessary to use gyroscope data immediately,
model all degradations, employ our pose drift corrections
schemes, and perform view-diversity-based opacity resetting.
Additionally, it is shown that onboard camera noise filters
can severely harm performance in the indoor scene.
4.4. Restoration Evaluation
We compare the restoration performance of TRGS-SLAM in
combination with offline refinement (Sec. 3.8) against TRN-
eRF [7] and the best performing baseline from that paper,
GS on the Move [41] (both using ground truth poses). The
parameters used for offline refinement are given in Sec. H.
Table 2. LPIPS results on the TRNeRF dataset (lower is better)
Method
MO
FO
MI
FI
GS on the Move*
0.093
0.283
0.206
0.328
TRNeRF*
0.042
0.078
0.068
0.117
TRGS-SLAM + Refinement
0.067
0.098
0.095
0.116
*Utilize ground truth poses. Results copied from [7].
The LPIPS results are given in Tab. 2 and qualitative results
are shown in Fig. 6. Remarkably, the results are competitive
with TRNeRF, even marginally outperforming it on the FI
sequence.
4.5. Timing & Memory Analysis
With a NVIDIA RTX A6000 GPU and an AMD Ryzen 9
5950X CPU, tracking runs at 5-7 Hz and mapping takes
1.3-1.6 seconds per keyframe. Due to the variable frequency
of keyframe generation, this leads to an overall FPS of 1-4,
with the lowest FPS in the fast sequences. While similar to
MonoGS [31], this FPS falls well short of real time operation
with fast motion. More timing information and a broader
discussion of limitations are provided in Sec. J and Sec. K,
respectively. Owing to our Gaussians’ scalar intensities
(rather than RGB or spherical harmonic values) and our
opacity resetting strategy (which limits the total number of
Gaussians to ∼20k-40k), our system consumes a low amount
of memory, peaking at 423 MiB of allocated GPU memory
across all SLAM runs.
5. Conclusion
We introduce a thermal inertial SLAM system uniquely
capable of accurate tracking on severely degraded images
and of supporting, through offline refinement, high quality
image restoration without known poses. This robustness is
achieved by combining a 3DGS map and microbolometer-
aware rendering method with a continuous B-spline
trajectory and tight IMU fusion. One future direction is the

<!-- page 9 -->
extension to large-scale scenes through degradation aware
place recognition and loop closure. Future work could also
assess the long-term capability of FPN estimation, and
whether shutter-based NUCs can be avoided. Additionally,
our method could be applied to rolling shutter visible
spectrum cameras, with many of the core elements retained.
References
[1] Gwangtak Bae, Changwoon Choi, Hyeongjun Heo, Sang Min
Kim, and Young Min Kim. I2-SLAM: Inverting imaging
process for robust photorealistic dense slam. In European
Conference on Computer Vision, pages 72–89, 2024. 1, 3
[2] Yucheng Bai. A real-time visual-inertial slam with neural
radiance fields mapping. In Proceedings of the 3rd Interna-
tional Conference on Computer, Artificial Intelligence and
Control Engineering, pages 514–523, 2024. 3
[3] Michael Bloesch, Sammy Omari, Marco Hutter, and Roland
Siegwart. Robust visual inertial odometry using a direct EKF-
based approach. In 2015 IEEE/RSJ International Conference
on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages 298–304,
2015. 2, 8
[4] Michael Bloesch, Michael Burri, Sammy Omari, Marco Hut-
ter, and Roland Siegwart. Iterated extended Kalman filter
based visual-inertial odometry using direct photometric feed-
back. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 36
(10):1053–1072, 2017. 2, 8
[5] Paulo Vinicius Koerich Borges and Stephen Vidas. Practical
infrared visual odometry. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
Transportation Systems, 17(8):2205–2213, 2016. 2
[6] Carlos Campos, Richard Elvira, Juan J. G´omez Rodr´ıguez,
Jos´e M. M. Montiel, and Juan D. Tard´os. ORB-SLAM3: An
accurate open-source library for visual, visual–inertial, and
multimap SLAM. IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 37(6):
1874–1890, 2021. 2, 7
[7] Spencer Carmichael, Manohar Bhat, Mani Ramanagopal,
Austin Buchan, Ram Vasudevan, and Katherine A. Skinner.
TRNeRF: Restoring blurry, rolling shutter, and noisy thermal
images with neural radiance fields. In 2025 IEEE/CVF Win-
ter Conference on Applications of Computer Vision (WACV),
pages 7980–7990, 2025. 1, 2, 3, 5, 7, 8, 9
[8] Jie Chen, Pengshuai Hou, Haoyu Zhao, Zhendong Cao, and
Jie Zhao. Eamt-slam: edge-aided monocular thermal sen-
sor slam in low-illumination environments. IEEE Sensors
Journal, 2024. 1, 2
[9] Wenbo Chen and Ligang Liu. Deblur-GS: 3D Gaussian Splat-
ting from Camera Motion Blurred Images. Proceedings of
the ACM on Computer Graphics and Interactive Techniques,
7(1):1–15, 2024. 1, 2
[10] Manash Pratim Das, Larry Matthies, and Shreyansh Daftry.
Online photometric calibration of automatic gain thermal
infrared cameras. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 6
(2):2453–2460, 2021. 2
[11] Christopher Doer and Gert F. Trommer. Radar Visual Inertial
Odometry and Radar Thermal Inertial Odometry: Robust
Navigation even in Challenging Visual Conditions. In 2021
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pages 331–338, 2021. ISSN: 2153-0866. 2
[12] Henrik Dobbe Flemmen.
Rovtio: Robust visual thermal
inertial odometry. Master’s thesis, NTNU, 2021. 2, 8
[13] Rikke Gade and Thomas B. Moeslund. Thermal cameras and
applications: a survey. Machine Vision and Applications, 25
(1):245–262, 2014. 1
[14] Francesco Girlanda, Denys Rozumnyi, Marc Pollefeys, and
Martin R Oswald. Deblur gaussian splatting slam. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2503.12572, 2025. 1, 3
[15] Michael Grupp.
evo:
Python package for the evalua-
tion of odometry and slam.
https://github.com/
MichaelGrupp/evo, 2017. 8
[16] Yicheng He, Guangcheng Chen, and Hong Zhang. Optimiz-
ing nerf-based slam with trajectory smoothness constraints.
In 2025 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation (ICRA), pages 11054–11060, 2025. 3
[17] Pengshuai Hou, Jie Chen, Yule Shao, Xingquan Chen, and
Xuehe Zhang. Robust thermal–inertial slam with online photo-
metric calibration and point-edge flow tracking. Measurement
Science and Technology, 36(8):086308, 2025. 1, 2
[18] Bernhard Kerbl, Georgios Kopanas, Thomas Leimkuehler,
and George Drettakis. 3D Gaussian Splatting for Real-Time
Radiance Field Rendering. ACM Transactions on Graphics,
42(4):1–14, 2023. 2, 4, 6
[19] Christian Kerl, Jorg Stuckler, and Daniel Cremers. Dense
continuous-time tracking and mapping with rolling shutter
rgb-d cameras. In Proceedings of the IEEE international
conference on computer vision, pages 2264–2272, 2015. 3
[20] Shehryar Khattak, Frank Mascarich, Tung Dang, Christos
Papachristos, and Kostas Alexis. Robust Thermal-Inertial
Localization for Aerial Robots: A Case for Direct Methods.
In 2019 International Conference on Unmanned Aircraft Sys-
tems (ICUAS), pages 1061–1068, 2019. 2, 8
[21] Shehryar Khattak, Huan Nguyen, Frank Mascarich, Tung
Dang, and Kostas Alexis. Complementary multi–modal sen-
sor fusion for resilient robot pose estimation in subterranean
environments.
In 2020 International Conference on Un-
manned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pages 1024–1029, 2020.
2
[22] Jae-Hak Kim, Cesar Cadena, and Ian Reid. Direct semi-dense
slam for rolling shutter cameras. In 2016 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pages 1308–
1315, 2016. 3
[23] Luguang Lai, Linyang Li, Yuxuan Zhou, Letian Zhang,
and Dongqing Zhao. TPL-SLAM: Real-Time Monocular
Thermal-Inertial SLAM With Point-Line Tracked by Optical
Flow. IEEE Sensors Journal, pages 1–1, 2025. 1, 2
[24] Xiaolei Lang, Jiajun Lv, Jianxin Huang, Yukai Ma, Yong Liu,
and Xingxing Zuo. Ctrl-VIO: Continuous-time visual-inertial
odometry for rolling shutter cameras. IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, 7(4):11537–11544, 2022. 3
[25] Dongwoo Lee, Jeongtaek Oh, Jaesung Rim, Sunghyun Cho,
and Kyoung Mu Lee.
Exblurf: Efficient radiance fields
for extreme motion blurred images. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF International Conference on Computer Vision,
pages 17639–17648, 2023. 1, 2

<!-- page 10 -->
[26] Junwoon Lee, Taisei Ando, Mitsuru Shinozaki, Toshihiro
Kitajima, Qi An, and Atsushi Yamashita. Self-tio: Thermal-
inertial odometry via self-supervised 16-bit feature extractor
and tracker. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, 2024. 1,
2
[27] Moyang Li, Peng Wang, Lingzhe Zhao, Bangyan Liao, and
Peidong Liu. Usb-nerf: Unrolling shutter bundle adjusted
neural radiance fields. In International Conference on Repre-
sentation Learning, pages 55719–55739, 2024. 2
[28] DaoQing Liao and Wei Ai. Vi-nerf-slam: a real-time visual–
inertial slam with nerf mapping. Journal of Real-Time Image
Processing, 21(2):30, 2024. 3
[29] Steven Lovegrove, Alonso Patron-Perez, and Gabe Sibley.
Spline Fusion: A continuous-time representation for visual-
inertial fusion with application to rolling shutter cameras. In
Procedings of the British Machine Vision Conference 2013,
pages 93.1–93.11, 2013. 3
[30] Mostafa Mansour, Ahmed Abdelsalam, Ari Happonen, Jari
Porras, and Esa Rahtu. Udgs-slam: Unidepth assisted gaus-
sian splatting for monocular slam. Array, page 100400, 2025.
2
[31] Hidenobu Matsuki, Riku Murai, Paul H. J. Kelly, and An-
drew J. Davison. Gaussian Splatting SLAM. In Proceedings
of the IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition, 2024. 2, 5, 7, 8
[32] Ben Mildenhall, Pratul P Srinivasan, Matthew Tancik,
Jonathan T Barron, Ravi Ramamoorthi, and Ren Ng. Nerf:
Representing scenes as neural radiance fields for view syn-
thesis. Communications of the ACM, 65(1):99–106, 2021. 1,
2
[33] Tarek Mouats, Nabil Aouf, David Nam, and Stephen Vidas.
Performance Evaluation of Feature Detectors and Descriptors
Beyond the Visible. Journal of Intelligent & Robotic Systems,
92(1):33–63, 2018. 2
[34] Riku Murai, Eric Dexheimer, and Andrew J Davison. Mast3r-
slam: Real-time dense slam with 3d reconstruction priors. In
Proceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, pages 16695–16705, 2025. 7, 8
[35] Linfei Pan, D´aniel Bar´ath, Marc Pollefeys, and Johannes L
Sch¨onberger. Global structure-from-motion revisited. In Eu-
ropean Conference on Computer Vision, pages 58–77, 2024.
7
[36] Christos Papachristos, Frank Mascarich, and Kostas Alexis.
Thermal-inertial localization for autonomous navigation of
aerial robots through obscurants. In 2018 International Con-
ference on Unmanned Aircraft Systems (ICUAS), pages 394–
399, 2018. 2
[37] Alonso Patron-Perez, Steven Lovegrove, and Gabe Sibley. A
Spline-Based Trajectory Representation for Sensor Fusion
and Rolling Shutter Cameras. International Journal of Com-
puter Vision, 113(3):208–219, 2015. 3
[38] Vincenzo Polizzi, Robert Hewitt, Javier Hidalgo-Carri´o, Jeff
Delaune, and Davide Scaramuzza. Data-efficient collabora-
tive decentralized thermal-inertial odometry. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 7(4):10681–10688, 2022. 1, 2
[39] Paul-Edouard Sarlin, Cesar Cadena, Roland Siegwart, and
Marcin Dymczyk. From Coarse to Fine: Robust Hierarchical
Localization at Large Scale. In 2019 IEEE/CVF Conference
on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages
12708–12717, 2019. 7
[40] Johannes L. Schonberger and Jan-Michael Frahm. Structure-
from-Motion Revisited. In 2016 IEEE Conference on Com-
puter Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), pages 4104–
4113, 2016. 7
[41] Otto Seiskari, Jerry Ylilammi, Valtteri Kaatrasalo, Pekka
Rantalankila, Matias Turkulainen, Juho Kannala, Esa Rahtu,
and Arno Solin. Gaussian splatting on the move: Blur and
rolling shutter compensation for natural camera motion. In
European conference on computer vision, pages 160–177,
2024. 2, 8
[42] Christiane Sommer, Vladyslav Usenko, David Schubert,
Nikolaus Demmel, and Daniel Cremers. Efficient Deriva-
tive Computation for Cumulative B-Splines on Lie Groups.
In 2020 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pat-
tern Recognition (CVPR), pages 11145–11153, 2020. 7, 1,
2
[43] Lukas von Stumberg and Daniel Cremers. DM-VIO: Delayed
Marginalization Visual-Inertial Odometry. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 7(2):1408–1415, 2022. 7
[44] Lisong C Sun, Neel P Bhatt, Jonathan C Liu, Zhiwen Fan,
Zhangyang Wang, Todd E Humphreys, and Ufuk Topcu.
Mm3dgs slam: Multi-modal 3d gaussian splatting for slam
using vision, depth, and inertial measurements.
In 2024
IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and
Systems (IROS), pages 10159–10166, 2024. 2, 3
[45] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. Tangent space backpropaga-
tion for 3d transformation groups. In Proceedings of the
IEEE/CVF conference on computer vision and pattern recog-
nition, pages 10338–10347, 2021. 7, 1, 2
[46] Zachary Teed and Jia Deng. DROID-SLAM: Deep Visual
SLAM for Monocular, Stereo, and RGB-D Cameras. In
Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, pages
16558–16569, 2021. 2, 7, 8
[47] Fabio Tosi, Youmin Zhang, Ziren Gong, Erik Sandstr¨om,
Stefano Mattoccia, Martin R. Oswald, and Matteo Poggi. How
NeRFs and 3D Gaussian Splatting are Reshaping SLAM: a
Survey, 2024. arXiv:2402.13255 [cs]. 2
[48] Benjamin Ronald Van Manen, Victor Sluiter, and Abeje Yene-
hun Mersha. FirebotSLAM: Thermal SLAM to Increase Situ-
ational Awareness in Smoke-Filled Environments. Sensors,
23(17):7611, 2023. 1, 2
[49] Stephen Vidas, Ruan Lakemond, Simon Denman, Clinton
Fookes, Sridha Sridharan, and Tim Wark. An Exploration
of Feature Detector Performance in the Thermal-Infrared
Modality. In 2011 International Conference on Digital Image
Computing: Techniques and Applications, pages 217–224,
2011. 2
[50] Chen Wang, Dasong Gao, Kuan Xu, Junyi Geng, Yaoyu Hu,
Yuheng Qiu, Bowen Li, Fan Yang, Brady Moon, Abhinav
Pandey, Aryan, Jiahe Xu, Tianhao Wu, Haonan He, Daning
Huang, Zhongqiang Ren, Shibo Zhao, Taimeng Fu, Pranay
Reddy, Xiao Lin, Wenshan Wang, Jingnan Shi, Rajat Ta-
lak, Kun Cao, Yi Du, Han Wang, Huai Yu, Shanzhao Wang,
Siyu Chen, Ananth Kashyap, Rohan Bandaru, Karthik Dantu,

<!-- page 11 -->
Jiajun Wu, Lihua Xie, Luca Carlone, Marco Hutter, and Se-
bastian Scherer. PyPose: A library for robot learning with
physics-based optimization. In IEEE/CVF Conference on
Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition (CVPR), 2023. 7,
1, 2, 3
[51] Peng Wang, Lingzhe Zhao, Ruijie Ma, and Peidong Liu. BAD-
NeRF: Bundle Adjusted Deblur Neural Radiance Fields. In
2023 IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern
Recognition (CVPR), pages 4170–4179, 2023. 1, 2
[52] Peng Wang, Lingzhe Zhao, Yin Zhang, Shiyu Zhao, and
Peidong Liu. Mba-slam: Motion blur aware dense visual
slam with radiance fields representation. IEEE Transactions
on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, 2025. 1, 3
[53] Yu Wang, Haoyao Chen, Yufeng Liu, and Shiwu Zhang. Edge-
Based Monocular Thermal-Inertial Odometry in Visually De-
graded Environments. IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters,
8(4):2078–2085, 2023. 1, 2
[54] Ke Wu, Zicheng Zhang, Muer Tie, Ziqing Ai, Zhongxue Gan,
and Wenchao Ding. Vings-mono: Visual-inertial gaussian
splatting monocular slam in large scenes. IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, 41:5912–5931, 2025. 3
[55] Qi Wu, Janick Martinez Esturo, Ashkan Mirzaei, Nicolas
Moenne-Loccoz, and Zan Gojcic. 3dgut: Enabling distorted
cameras and secondary rays in gaussian splatting. In Pro-
ceedings of the Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition
Conference, pages 26036–26046, 2025. 2
[56] Yuzhen Wu, Lingxue Wang, Lian Zhang, Mingkun Chen,
Wenqu Zhao, Dezhi Zheng, and Yi Cai. Monocular thermal
slam with neural radiance fields for 3d scene reconstruction.
Neurocomputing, 617:129041, 2025. 1, 2, 3
[57] P.V. Karthik Yadav, Isha Yadav, B. Ajitha, Abraham Rajasekar,
Sudha Gupta, and Y. Ashok Kumar Reddy. Advancements
of uncooled infrared microbolometer materials: A review.
Sensors and Actuators A: Physical, 342:113611, 2022. 1
[58] Vickie Ye, Ruilong Li, Justin Kerr, Matias Turkulainen, Brent
Yi, Zhuoyang Pan, Otto Seiskari, Jianbo Ye, Jeffrey Hu,
Matthew Tancik, et al. gsplat: An open-source library for
gaussian splatting. Journal of Machine Learning Research,
26(34):1–17, 2025. 2, 7, 6
[59] Zehao Yu, Anpei Chen, Binbin Huang, Torsten Sattler, and
Andreas Geiger. Mip-splatting: Alias-free 3d gaussian splat-
ting. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF conference on com-
puter vision and pattern recognition, pages 19447–19456,
2024. 7
[60] Lingzhe Zhao, Peng Wang, and Peidong Liu. Bad-gaussians:
Bundle adjusted deblur gaussian splatting. In European Con-
ference on Computer Vision, pages 233–250, 2024. 1, 2
[61] Shibo Zhao, Peng Wang, Hengrui Zhang, Zheng Fang, and Se-
bastian Scherer. TP-TIO: A Robust Thermal-Inertial Odome-
try with Deep ThermalPoint. In 2020 IEEE/RSJ International
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pages
4505–4512, 2020. 1, 2
[62] Yuxuan Zhou, Xingxing Li, Shengyu Li, Xuanbin Wang,
Shaoquan Feng, and Yuxuan Tan. Dba-fusion: tightly in-
tegrating deep dense visual bundle adjustment with multi-
ple sensors for large-scale localization and mapping. IEEE
Robotics and Automation Letters, 9(7):6138–6145, 2024. 7, 8
[63] Liyuan Zhu, Yue Li, Erik Sandstr¨om, Shengyu Huang, Kon-
rad Schindler, and Iro Armeni. Loopsplat: Loop closure by
registering 3d gaussian splats. In 2025 International Confer-
ence on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 156–167, 2025. 9
[64] Zihan Zhu, Songyou Peng, Viktor Larsson, Zhaopeng Cui,
Martin R Oswald, Andreas Geiger, and Marc Pollefeys. Nicer-
slam: Neural implicit scene encoding for rgb slam. In 2024
International Conference on 3D Vision (3DV), pages 42–52,
2024. 2
[65] Jon Zubizarreta, Iker Aguinaga, and Jose Maria Martinez
Montiel.
Direct sparse mapping.
IEEE Transactions on
Robotics, 36(4):1363–1370, 2020. 3, 7
[66] David Zu˜niga-No¨el, Francisco-Angel Moreno, and Javier
Gonzalez-Jimenez. An analytical solution to the imu initial-
ization problem for visual-inertial systems. IEEE Robotics
and Automation Letters, 6(3):6116–6122, 2021. 7

<!-- page 12 -->
TRGS-SLAM: IMU-Aided Gaussian Splatting SLAM for Blurry, Rolling Shutter,
and Noisy Thermal Images
Supplementary Material
In this supplementary material, we provide additional de-
tails on our B-spline implementation (Sec. A), undistorted
microbolometer image model (Sec. B), discrete approxima-
tion of motion blur (Sec. C), mapping optimization (Sec. D),
modified gradient accumulation (Sec. E), and trajectory trans-
formations applied after IMU initialization and IMU updates
(Sec. F). We also provide additional details on the dataset
we run on (Sec. G) and the parameter values we use in all
runs (Sec. H). Moreover, we provide supplementary results
in the form of an ablation study (Sec. I) and further timing
analysis (Sec. J). Finally, we provide a broader discussion of
the limitations of our method (Sec. K).
A. B-Spline Implementation Details
We introduce a standalone package for B-spline optimiza-
tion in PyTorch. The package supports B-splines in Rd and
SO(3). This section describes our trajectory implementa-
tion specifically, but the expressions involving position can
generalize to Rd (and we exploit this to implement the FPN
components with splines in Rwh and R). The functionality
described in Sec. A.5 for extending the B-splines, fitting
them to predictions, and making constant velocity predic-
tions, is also included in the package (but IMU integration is
implemented separately).
A.1. B-spline Formulation
As stated in Sec. 3.2, we represent the continuous-time tra-
jectory using two separate uniform B-splines for position
p(t) ∈R3 and rotation R(t) ∈SO(3). Specifically, we use
a non-cumulative B-spline for the positions, and a cumula-
tive B-spline for the rotations. At time t ∈[ti, ti+1) , the
position and rotation are given as:
p(t) =
pi
pi+1 · · · pi+k−1

M(k)u = P(k)
i
M(k)u
R(t) = Ri
k−1
Y
j=1
Exp
 λj(t) Log
 R−1
i+j−1Ri+j

λ(t) = M∗(k)u, u =

1
u · · · uk−1T , u = t −ti
∆tc(18)
where k is the order of the splines, {pi}Nc−1
i=0
and {Ri}Nc−1
i=0
are the position and rotation control points, {ti}Nc−1
i=0
are the
knots, ∆tc = ti+1 −ti ∀i is the knot interval, and M(k)
and M∗(k) are the non-cumulative and cumulative blending
matrices, respectively. Note that for uniform B-splines (those
with constant ∆tc) both M(k) and M∗(k) are constant and
determined solely by the spline order k [42].
A.2. B-spline Derivatives
Given the definitions of the position and rotation splines in
Eq. (18), the linear velocity v(t) and acceleration a(t) can
be computed as:
v(t) = P(k)
i
M(k) ˙u, a(t) = P(k)
i
M(k)¨u
˙u =
1
∆tc

0
1
2u · · · (k −1)uk−2T
¨u =
1
∆t2c

0
0
2
6u · · · (k −1)(k −2)uk−3T
(19)
and we can compute the angular velocity ω(t) directly by
applying the following efficient recursive expression from
j = 1 to j = k [42]:
ω(j)(t) =
 Ai
j−1(t)
−1 ω(j−1)(t) + ˙λj−1(t) di
j−1
Ai
j(t) = Exp
 λj(t)di
j

, di
j = Log
 R−1
i+j−1Ri+j

˙λ(t) = M∗(k) ˙u, ω(1)(t) = 0
(20)
A.3. On-Manifold Parameter Updates, Efficient
Forward Passes, & Analytical Backward
Passes for SO(3) B-Splines
One common approach to optimizing rotations in PyTorch
is to store them in the minimal axis-angle format, apply the
exponential and logarithm maps to convert to and from rota-
tion matrices as needed, and rely on PyTorch’s default tools
for automatic differentiation and optimization. Storing the
parameters as axis-angle vectors ensures they remain valid
rotations, but the standard PyTorch backward passes through
the exponential and logarithm maps include numerically un-
stable terms [45]. It is more stable and accurate to compute
tangent space gradients through custom backward passes
and perform on-manifold parameter updates [45]. PyPose
[50] and LieTorch [45] are PyTorch libraries that provide
this functionality.
In our package, we implement the rotation spline to re-
turn a pypose.SO3 [50] or lietorch.SO3 [45] object
when it is evaluated (Eq. (18)). In either case, this ensures
that the gradients for the returned rotations are computed in
the tangent space. Our custom backward passes, described
below, also compute gradients in the tangent space, and we
perform on-manifold updates to the rotation control points
in optimization. That is, an update step for control point Ri
is performed as Ri ←Exp(δi)Ri where δi is the optimizer
increment computed from the tangent space gradient of Ri.
We implement three different versions of the forward

<!-- page 13 -->
Table 3. Timing comparison between different versions of our
rotation spline.
Version
Device
Number of
Timestamps
Evaluated
Rotation Loss
Compute Time (ms)
Ang. Vel. Loss
Compute Time (ms)
Forward
Backward
Forward
Backward
PyPose
CPU
1k
5.45
4.97
5.64
5.71
LieTorch
CPU
1k
1.68
1.39
1.82
1.48
C++
CPU
1k
0.59
0.41
0.51
0.27
PyPose
GPU
1k
14.30
13.74
15.44
15.55
LieTorch
GPU
1k
3.11
2.12
4.28
2.28
C++
GPU
1k
0.81
0.38
0.73
0.30
PyPose
CPU
100k
34.70
89.19
30.76
91.55
LieTorch
CPU
100k
44.99
80.67
43.78
85.54
C++
CPU
100k
16.65
14.47
11.16
3.20
PyPose
GPU
100k
14.87
15.63
15.25
17.43
LieTorch
GPU
100k
3.93
2.37
4.20
2.38
C++
GPU
100k
18.90
1.22
33.89
1.11
passes for evaluating the rotation spline Eq. (18) and its an-
gular velocity Eq. (20): one using PyPose [50], one using
LieTorch [45], and one using multi-threaded C++ functions
that run on the CPU and are called through Python bind-
ings. We leave the backward passes for the LieTorch and
PyPose versions to be handled automatically by their respec-
tive libraries. For the C++ version, we implement custom
backward passes utilizing the efficient algorithms given in
[42] for computing the Jacobians of the rotations and angu-
lar velocities with respect to the control points. To avoid
redundant calculations, these Jacobians are computed in the
forward pass and stored for the backward pass if gradients
are needed.
Table 3 shows a timing comparison between the three
versions we implemented, operating with a NVIDIA RTX
A6000 GPU and an AMD Ryzen 9 5950X CPU. The com-
parison shows the time taken for the forward and backward
pass of computing a rotation loss (similar to Eq. (23)) and
an angular velocity loss (similar to Eq. (7), without the ac-
celerometer term). The table shows results for the splines
being evaluated at 1k timestamps and 100k timestamps, with
the control points stored on the CPU or GPU. Note that
when our C++ implementation is used with the control points
stored on the GPU, data is transferred to the CPU for the
forward pass only. The results indicate that the C++ version,
with control points stored on the CPU, is the most efficient
when the spline is evaluated at a relatively small number of
timestamps, while the LieTorch version, with control points
stored on the GPU, is the fastest with a large number of
timestamps. Therefore, we use the C++ version in SLAM,
with the trajectory control points and the IMU bias parame-
ters stored on the CPU, and the LieTorch version in offline
refinement, with all parameters stored on the GPU.
Additionally, as we generally observed LieTorch opera-
tions and backward passes to be more efficient than PyPose,
we configure the rotation spline to return a lietorch.SO3
object when evaluated in SLAM and offline refinement (re-
gardless of whether the actual spline evaluation was per-
formed with LieTorch or our C++ implementation).
A.4. Sparse Gradients and Optimization
For each spline, we store the entire set of control points as an
individual PyTorch Parameter. To ensure that only active
control points are updated at each iteration, our spline im-
plementations return sparse gradients and we use PyTorch’s
SparseAdam optimizer to update them. If we were to re-
turn dense gradients and use the standard Adam optimizer,
the inactive control point gradients would be zero, the cor-
responding moments in the optimizer state would be falsely
updated using these zero-valued gradients, and the inactive
control points themselves would be falsely updated (if their
moments are non-zero from past active iterations), despite
taking no part in the current loss calculation. SparseAdam,
by contrast, only updates the moments and parameters in-
dexed by the sparse gradient it receives. In our implemen-
tation, this is essentially equivalent to, though much more
efficient than, storing the control points as individual Py-
Torch Parameters and updating them with separate Adam
optimizers2.
A.5. B-Spline Extension Details
Duplication & Fitting to Predictions
As explained in
Sec. 3.5, the position and rotation splines can only be evalu-
ated for t ∈[t0, t0 + (Nc −k + 1)∆tc) and control points
must be added when a new image arrives. The number of
new control points needed to accommodate image l is:
Nnew = ⌊tmax,l −t0
∆tc
⌋+ k −Nc
(21)
These new control points are initialized by duplicating
pNc−1 and RNc−1.
After a set number of keyframes, we additionally compute
Nq predicted poses at times {tpred,q}Nq−1
q=0
evenly spaced
over [t′
0,0,l−1, tmax,l] and fit the active sets of position and
rotation control points,
P = {pi}Nc+Nnew−1
i=⌊(t′
0,0,l−1−t0)/∆tc⌋
R = {Ri}Nc+Nnew−1
i=⌊(t′
0,0,l−1−t0)/∆tc⌋
(22)
to these predictions. Specifically, we separately solve the
following optimization problems:
arg min
P
Nq−1
X
q=0
∥p(tpred,q) −ppred,q∥2
2
arg min
R
Nq−1
X
q=0
Log

(R(tpred,q))−1 Rpred,q

2
2
(23)
2The current PyTorch implementation of SparseAdam uses a single
step counter to compute the bias correction. This quickly reduces to Adam
without bias correction for new control points. We tested a custom imple-
mentation with an element-wise step counter but found empirically that this
harmed performance.

<!-- page 14 -->
where {ppred,q}Nq−1
q=0
and {Rpred,q}Nq−1
q=0
are the predicted
positions and rotations. Nq is set larger than the number
of active control points (Nq > Nc + Nnew −⌊(t′
0,0,l−1 −
t0)/∆tc⌋) to ensure the problems are overdetermined. We
use the PyPose [50] implementation of Levenberg–Marquard
to solve these problems within the PyTorch framework.
Note that it is necessary to fit the control points to the
predictions because B-spline control points do not generally
sit on the spline itself and therefore the value of the spline
cannot be trivially set directly.
Constant Velocity Predictions
Prior to IMU initialization,
the predictions are made assuming constant velocity. The
instantaneous velocities of the splines (Eqs. 19 and 20) can
be noisy, especially prior to IMU initialization. Therefore,
we compute finite difference estimates of the linear and
angular velocities as follows:
¯vW
C,avg(t′
0,0,l−1) =
¯pW
C (t′
0,0,l−1) −¯pW
C (t′
0,0,l−1 −TI)
TI
ωC
C,avg(t′
0,0,l−1) =
Log

RW
C (t′
0,0,l−1 −TI)
−1
RW
C (t′
0,0,l−1)

TI
(24)
where TI is the average frame period. The predicted position
and rotation at time tpred,q are then computed as:
¯pW
C,pred,q =
¯pW
C (t′
0,0,l−1) + (tpred,q −t′
0,0,l−1) ¯vW
C,avg(t′
0,0,l−1)
RW
C,pred,q =
RW
C (t′
0,0,l−1)Exp
 (tpred,q −t′
0,0,l−1) ωC
C,avg(t′
0,0,l−1)

(25)
IMU Integration Based Predictions
After IMU initializa-
tion, the predictions are made through IMU integration. Let
b denote the index of an IMU measurement taken exactly at
t′
0,0,l−1 and f denote the index of the last IMU measurement
taken before the prediction time tpred,q. Note that ˜ωI
I,b and
˜aI
I,b are interpolated using the IMU measurements taken im-
mediately before and after t′
0,0,l−1. We compute the position
and rotation at the time of the final IMU measurement tIMU,f
by integrating the IMU measurements from tIMU,b to tIMU,f
as follows:
RW
I,IMU,f = RW
I (t′
0,0,l−1)
f−1
Y
m=b
Exp
 (˜ωI
I,m −bg)∆tm

vW
I,IMU,f = vW
I (t′
0,0,l−1) +
f−1
X
m=b
GˆgW∆tm
+
f−1
X
m=b
RW
I,IMU,m(˜aI
I,m −ba)∆tm
pW
I,IMU,f = pW
I (t′
0,0,l−1) +
f−1
X
m=b
vW
I,IMU,m∆tm
+
f−1
X
m=b
1
2GˆgW∆t2
m
+
f−1
X
m=b
1
2RW
I,IMU,m(˜aI
I,m −ba)∆t2
m
(26)
where ∆tm = tIMU,m+1 −tIMU,m. Note that in this case
we do use the instantaneous linear velocity vW
I (t′
0,0,l−1)
(Eq. (19)), rather than a finite difference estimate. The pre-
dicted position and rotation at time tpred,q are then computed
as:
pW
I,pred,q = pW
I,IMU,f + vW
I,IMU,f∆tf + 1
2GˆgW∆t2
f
+ 1
2RW
I,IMU,f(˜aI
I,f −ba)∆t2
f
RW
I,pred,q = RW
I,IMU,fExp
 ˜ωI
I,f∆tf

(27)
where ∆tf = tpred,q −tIMU,f.
Optimizer State Management
When the B-splines are
extended, the control point Parameters are re-initialized
as the existing control points concatenated with the new ones.
The optimizer states corresponding to the new control points
are set to zero while the states corresponding to the existing
control points are retained. Note that in the fitting process
(Eq. (23)) the active sets of control points, P and R, include
existing control points that have already been optimized
through tracking and mapping. We initially restricted the
B-spline extension process to only fit the Nnew control points
to the pose predictions, to avoid manipulating control points
that may have already been well optimized. However, this
seemingly overfit the new control points, leading to a poor
initialization for tracking. It is also unclear whether the
optimizer states corresponding to these modified control
points should be zeroed. In practice, we have found it best
to leave these optimizer states unchanged.

<!-- page 15 -->
B. Undistorted Microbolometer Image Model
The undistortion of ˜N′
l can be written as follows:
[ ˜Nl]yp,xp = undistort( ˜N′
l, xp, yp)
= finterp( ˜N′
l, mapx(xp, yp), mapy(xp, yp))
(28)
where mapx(xp, yp) and mapy(xp, yp) map pixel coordi-
nates (xp, yp) in the undistorted image ˜Nl to fractional pixel
coordinates in ˜N′
l, and finterp denotes bilinear interpolation.
mapx(xp, yp) and mapy(xp, yp) are precomputed from the
original camera intrinsic matrix, distortion parameters, and
the new camera matrix. Bilinear interpolation is used here to
estimate the value of ˜N′
l at the fractional pixel coordinates
and it can written as:
finterp(Q, x, y) =
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij[Q]yf +j,xf +i
(29)
where xf = ⌊x⌋, yf = ⌊y⌋, and {w00, w01, w10, w11} are
weights computed based the relative proximity of (x, y) to
the four neighboring integer coordinates. Note that these
weights sum to 1.
Let x = mapx(xp, yp) and y = mapy(xp, yp). We can
then write:
[ ˜Nl]yp,xp =
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij ˜n′
xf +i,yf +j(t′
xf +i,yf +j,l)
(30)
Given that the four neighboring pixels span only two rows,
their readout times differ only slightly. Therefore, we de-
fine the effective readout time of the pixel (xp, yp) in the
undistorted image as:
txp,yp,l =
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij t′
xf +i,yf +j,l
(31)
With this effective readout time, we can then write
˜
[Nl]yp,xp = ˜nxp,yp(txp,yp,l) and approximate Eq. (30) as:
[ ˜Nl]yp,xp ≈
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij ˜n′
xf +i,yf +j(txp,yp,l) (32)
Next, by expanding ˜n′
xf +i,yf +j(txp,yp,l) and distributing
the sum, we can write ˜nxp,yp(txp,yp,l) in the form of Eqs. 1
and 2:
˜nxp,yp(txp,yp,l) = ˜mxp,yp(txp,yp,l)+ ˜oxp,yp(txp,yp,l) (33)
˜mxp,yp(txp,yp,l) =
1
τ
Z txp,yp,l
−∞
exp
s −txp,yp,l
τ

˜pxp,yp(s)ds
(34)
where ˜mxp,yp(t), ˜oxp,yp(t) and ˜pxp,yp(t) are defined as:
˜mxp,yp(t) =
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij ˜m′
xf +i,yf +j(t)
(35)
˜oxp,yp(t) =
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij ˜o′
xf +i,yf +j(t)
(36)
˜pxp,yp(t) =
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij ˜p′
xf +i,yf +j(t)
(37)
In summary, the undistorted image can be written as
[ ˜Nl]yp,xp = ˜nxp,yp(txp,yp,l) where the individual pixel val-
ues ˜nxp,yp(txp,yp,l) can be written in the same form as Eqs.
1 and 2, but the readout time is determined by Eq. (31).
Note that the effective readout time in Eq. (31) can be
easily computed using the same undistortion operation ap-
plied to the images. Let T′
roll be a lookup table of the read-
out times in the distorted image, relative to t′
0,0,l. That is,
[T′
roll]yp,xp = xp∆tpix + ypw∆tpix. If we expand Eq. (31):
txp,yp,l =
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij t′
0,0,l
+
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij [T′
roll]yf+j,xf +i
= t′
0,0,l +
X
i∈{0,1}
X
j∈{0,1}
wij [T′
roll]yf+j,xf +i
(38)
it becomes clear from comparison to Eqs. 28 and 29 that this
can written as:
txp,yp,l = t′
0,0,l + undistort(T′
roll, xp, yp)
= t′
0,0,l + [Troll]yp,xp
(39)
Finally, note that we also downsample the images prior
to undistortion. We downsample by block averaging, using a
block size the image dimensions are divisible by. Following
a process similar to the preceding discussion on undistor-
tion, it can be shown that this block averaging approximately
preserves the image formation model but with new effective
readout times. In this case, the new readout times follow the
original expression given in Eq. (3), but with ∆tpix multi-
plied by the square of the block size.
C. Discrete Approximation of Motion Blur
As explained in Sec. 3.3, to compute [Ml]yp,xp
=
mxp,yp(txp,yp,l) we rasterize Nr images at times {tr}Nr−1
r=0
evenly spaced over [tmax,l −Tb, tmax,l] where tmax,l is defined
as:
tmax,l = t′
0,0,l + max(Troll)
(40)
Focusing on a single pixel, this means we have Nr sam-
ples {pxp,yp(tr)}Nr−1
r=0
and need to compute an estimate of
the blurry pixel value mxp,yp(txp,yp,l) with a discrete ap-
proximation of Eq. (34). In the following derivation we

<!-- page 16 -->
assume the most general case: the effective readout time
falls between two samples, i.e., tn < txp,yp,l < tn+1 for
some n where 0 ≤n < Nr −1.
To compute mxp,yp(txp,yp,l) we treat pxp,yp(tr) as linear
between samples, and break Eq. (34) up into a sum of inte-
grals over consecutive samples. Let ta and tb be consecutive
sample times with tb ≤tn. Dropping the pixel coordinate
subscripts for readability, we can write the portion of the
integral in Eq. (34) from ta to tb as:
1
τ
Z tb
ta
exp
s −tl
τ

p(s)ds =
1
τ
Z tb
ta
exp
s −tl
τ

(p(ta) + va,b (s −ta)) ds
(41)
where va,b is the slope of p(t) between ta and tb:
va,b = p(tb) −p(ta)
tb −ta
= p(tb) −p(ta)
∆tr
,
∆tr =
Tb
Nr −1
(42)
The result of Eq. (41) is:

exp
s −tl
τ

(p(ta) −va,b (ta −s + τ))
tb
ta
=

exp
s −tl
τ

((p(ta) + va,b (s −ta)) −va,b τ)
tb
ta
=

exp
s −tl
τ

(p(s) −va,b τ)
tb
ta
(43)
Evaluating Eq. (43), substituting in Eq. (42), letting Ea =
exp
  ta−tl
τ

and Eb = exp
  tb−tl
τ

, and grouping terms by
p(ta) and p(tb) we get:
1
τ
Z tb
ta
exp
s −tl
τ

p(s)ds =
p(ta)(Eb
τ
∆tr
−Ea(1 +
τ
∆tr
))
+ p(tb)(Eb(1 −
τ
∆tr
) + Ea
τ
∆tr
)
(44)
Next, because tn < tl < tn+1, the portion of the integral
in Eq. (34) from tn to tl is computed as:
1
τ
Z tl
tn
exp
s −tl
τ

p(s)ds =

exp
s −tl
τ

(p(s) −vn,n+1 τ)
tl
tn
=
p(tn)

1 −tl −tn
∆tr
+
τ
∆tr
−En(1 +
τ
∆tr
)

+ p(tn+1)
tl −tn
∆tr
−
τ
∆tr
+ En
τ
∆tr

(45)
Putting this together we can write:
1
τ
Z tl
tmax,l−Tb
exp
s −tl
τ

p(s)ds =
Nr−1
X
r=0
(hr + dr)p(tr)
(46)
where hr and dr are set based on the grouped terms in Eqs.
44 and 45, respectively. Specifically, using j = ⌊tl−tr
∆tr ⌋, hr
and dr are defined as:
hr =















0
if j < 0
0
if j = 0, r = 0
Er(1 −
τ
∆tr ) + Er−1
τ
∆tr
if j = 0, r ̸= 0
Er+1
τ
∆tr −Er(1 +
τ
∆tr )
if j > 0, r = 0
τ
∆tr (Er−1 −2Er + Er+1)
if j > 0, r ̸= 0
(47)
dr =





tl−tr−1
∆tr
−
τ
∆tr + Er−1
τ
∆tr
if j = −1
1 −tl−tr
∆tr +
τ
∆tr −Er(1 +
τ
∆tr )
if j = 0
0
else
(48)
Note that the cases involving j are used to determine whether
the sample p(tr) contributes to a full segment (Eq. (44)),
partial segment (Eq. (45)), or both. For r ̸= 0:
• j = −1 implies r is the right endpoint of the partial seg-
ment (r = n + 1 in Eq. (45)), only
• j = 0 implies r is the left endpoint of the partial segment
(r = n in Eq. (45)) and the right endpoint of the last full
segment (r = b in Eq. (44))
• j > 0 implies r is an interior point, acting as both the
left endpoint and right endpoint of two consecutive full
segments (r = a and r = b in Eq. (44))
In the special case of the first sample, r = 0:
• j = 0 implies r is the left endpoint of the partial segment
(r = n in Eq. (45)), only
• j > 0 implies r is the left endpoint of a full segment
(r = a in Eq. (44)), only
Given that the integral in Eq. (34) is unbounded, the result
of the truncated integral in Eq. (46) may be significantly
smaller than the true value. To approximately compensate
for this we consider the case of constant p(t) = p. In this
case, the result of the unbounded integral in Eq. (34) is p and
the result of Eq. (46) is:
p
τ
Z tl
tmax,l−Tb
exp
s −tl
τ

ds =
p

1 −exp
tmax,l −Tb −tl
τ

(49)
Therefore, we compute the pixel-wise correction factor as:
g =

1 −exp
tmax,l −Tb −tl
τ
−1
(50)

<!-- page 17 -->
The final expression for mxp,yp(txp,yp,l) is:
mxp,yp(txp,yp,l) =
gxp,yp
Nr−1
X
r=0
(hxp,yp,r + dxp,yp,r)pxp,yp(tr)
(51)
where the pixel coordinate subscripts have been reintroduced
for clarity.
Finally, we can construct the weight matrix Wr as:
[Wr]yp,xp = gxp,yp(hxp,yp,r + dxp,yp,r)
(52)
Pivotally, [Wr]yp,xp is not dependent on the absolute read-
out time of the pixel txp,yp,l. Rather, [Wr]yp,xp is only
dependent on the relative time offsets between txp,yp,l and
the raster times {tr}Nr−1
r=0 . Therefore, the weight matrices
{Wr}Nr−1
r=0
can be precomputed.
D. Mapping Optimization Details
In Sec. 3.6 it was mentioned that WI and SI are disjoint
sets of IMU measurements associated with WK and SK.
Specifically, the full set of IMU measurements used in a
given mapping iteration Imap is the union of all sets of IMU
measurements taken over [min(t0,0,p, tmax,l −Tb), tmax,l] for
each keyframe image l, where p denotes the image index of
the keyframe prior to l. The measurements are split into WI
or SI depending on whether they came after or before tmax,l
of the latest randomly sampled keyframe, respectively.
The weighting applied in the mapping loss (Eq. (16)) is
intended to prevent the existing map from being overwrit-
ten when it is re-observed from an incorrect pose. In this
instance, we want any well-constrained portions of the map
to remain largely unchanged and we want the error in the
current keyframe window pose estimates to be corrected.
Applying the weighting in Eq. (16) with λs > λw reduces
the relative impact of the keyframe window views on the
Gaussians, but it also has a few unintended consequences.
First, the weighting reduces the gradients of the position
and rotation control points that contribute to the keyframe
window views. Reducing these gradients runs counter to
the goal of correcting the keyframe window pose error, so
we manually divide these gradients by λw/F, where F is
a set value (10 in all experiments). Second, the weighting
similarly increases the gradients of the position and rota-
tion control points that contribute to the randomly sampled
keyframe views. We want these views to remain stable so
we correct this by manually dividing these gradients by λs.
Third, it has undesirable effects on the gradients of the Gaus-
sians that are viewed primarily by the keyframe window
or randomly sampled keyframes. For example, if the sets
of Gaussians viewed by the keyframe window and the ran-
domly sampled keyframes are disjoint, then the Gaussians
viewed by the keyframe window will be updated too grad-
ually, while the Gaussians seen by the randomly sampled
keyframes will be updated too aggressively. We account
for this by manually reweighting the gradient of each Gaus-
sian parameter based on the fraction of the keyframes it
appears in being randomly sampled versus in the keyframe
window. Specifically, we divide a Gaussian’s gradients by
λs(NS/NW) + λw(1 −NS/NW) where NS is the number
of randomly sampled keyframes that view the Gaussian and
NW is the number of keyframes in the window that view the
Gaussian.
Finally, note that we blend a random background intensity
with each raster IG(tr) during mapping optimization (but not
during tracking). This is done to encourage high opacities.
E. Modified Gradient Accumulation
In gsplat [58], the image plane gradients of each Gaussian are
normalized such that a single image plane gradient threshold
can be consistently applied, regardless of the image reso-
lution or the batch size of renders used per iteration. The
mean of the normalized image plane gradients is computed
over multiple iterations by summing them and maintaining
a count of the number of rasters each Gaussian was vis-
ible in. When it comes time to apply the threshold, the
mean is computed by dividing the sum by the count. Our
microbolometer-aware rendering scheme complicates this
because we compute multiple rasters per render and the
rasters are weighted differently. To account for this, we sim-
ilarly normalize the image plane gradients, but we compute
the ”count” differently. Instead of incrementing the count by
1 for each raster the Gaussian is visible in, we increment the
count using the value of the weight matrix Wr associated
with that raster, evaluated at the Gaussian’s projected 2D
image coordinate.
F. IMU Initialization & Update Details
When the IMU is initialized, the trajectory is transformed
into the IMU frame with absolute scale by directly trans-
forming the position pi and rotation Ri control points as
follows:
pi ←RipC
I + Spi
Ri ←RiRC
I
(53)
where S is the estimated scale factor and pC
I and RC
I are the
inverted IMU extrinsics TI
C(t) = [RI
C, pI
C].
When the IMU parameters are updated, the scale update
is applied by directly transforming the position control points
as follows:
pi ←(RipI
C + pi)/Sprev
pi ←RiRI
CpC
I + Snewpi
(54)

<!-- page 18 -->
where Sprev is the previous scale estimate and Snew is the
new scale estimate.
Note that applying a rotation to the rotation control points,
as in Eq. (53), exactly rotates the entire spline, but the trans-
formations made to the position control points do not exactly
apply these transformations to the position spline itself. How-
ever, we have found this error to be negligible in practice.
Also note that after we apply these transformations we reini-
tialize the trajectory and IMU bias optimizers with zeroed
states.
G. Dataset Details
The TRNeRF dataset [7] was collected with two 640 × 512
60 Hz thermal cameras (FLIR ADK), and a 400 Hz IMU
(VectorNav VN-100). The thermal time constant of the FLIR
ADK cameras is τ = 8 ms and the readout time per pixel
is ∆tpix = 0.043 µs. To assess the impact of onboard noise
filters, only one camera had them enabled. Unless otherwise
noted, we run on the unfiltered data. We process a superset of
the data tested on in TRNeRF, including 10 second, medium-
speed segments at the start of each sequence that aid IMU
initialization. Specifically, we run on 230, 160, and 100
seconds of data in the slow, medium, and fast sequences
respectively. We obtain pseudo ground truth poses through
stereo visual structure from motion, as outlined in TRNeRF,
replacing COLMAP [40] with GLOMAP [35] and using
it on 4k images per scene prior to hloc [39]. To evaluate
restoration/rendering quality, the dataset provides pseudo
ground truth images for each medium and fast sequence.
Note that the TRNeRF dataset [7] is one of few thermal
SLAM datasets that offer the types of aggressive camera
motion we target with our method. Moreover, as highlighted
in our ablation study (Sec. I), it seems that onboard noise
filters can significantly violate the precise camera model-
ing our method relies on3. These filters are enabled by
default, making it likely (but unclear) that they are enabled
in datasets where this setting was not mentioned. Similarly,
many thermal cameras have an optional Automatic Gain
Control (AGC) feature that returns 8-bit images with en-
hanced contrast, rather than raw 16-bit images. Like the
noise filters, this contrast enhancement is a black-box algo-
rithm that likely has spatially varying and non-linear effects
that are challenging to model. Therefore, thermal datasets
with AGC enabled are also unsuitable for evaluating our
method. Ultimately, we test our method exclusively on the
TRNeRF dataset as it is the only dataset we are aware of that
accounts for these concerns.
3Note that we are specifically referring to online noise filters, not static
factory calibrated or shutter based corrections. The latter category of correc-
tions does not violate the microbolometer camera model we adopt because
they are constant offsets that are absorbed into the estimated FPN. Factory
calibrated corrections were enabled in the TRNeRF dataset and shutter
based NUCs were performed before each recording (but not during) [7].
H. Parameter Values
The full set of SLAM parameter values used for each se-
quence is given in Tab. 4. As explained in Sec. A.4, all spline
control points are optimized with PyTorch’s SparseAdam
optimizer. For the Gaussian and bias parameters the standard
Adam optimizer is used.
For offline refinement, the image downsample factor is set
to 1, the number of rasters per render is increased to 15, the
integration interval is increased to 40 ms, the accelerometer
residual loss coefficient is increased to 1×10−2, the bias loss
coefficient is set to 0, the bias learning rate is decreased to
1×10−4, the opacity threshold is lowered to 0.005, the image
plane gradient threshold is lowered to 2×10−4, densification
and pruning is performed every 250 iterations (up to the
4,000th iteration), and a global opacity reset is performed
once at 3k iterations. The gravity direction is introduced as
a learned parameter and it is optimized with the standard
Adam optimizer using a learning rate of 1 × 10−4. Offline
refinement is run for a total of 15k iterations using a batch
size of 10 renders.
I. Ablation Study
Our ablation study results are given in Tab. 5. Each method
tested in the ablation study was run on each sequence for
three trials. We report the number of trials completed and
the average RMSE ATE across the completed trials (if any).
Note that some trials are incomplete because our code ex-
its when the entire rasterized alpha image at the current
keyframe is beneath the threshold used for determining pix-
els to use in the median depth computation (0.95 in all of
our experiments). This reliably indicates severe tracking fail-
ure that has placed the current camera view in a completely
unmapped area.
Running our method without an IMU (i.e., in a pure
monocular mode) fails on all but the slow sequences. On
the SO sequence we observed that the initial estimate of the
scene structure is skewed and that this results in a globally
inconsistent trajectory. We found that using the gyroscope
data immediately can be pivotal to the initial estimate of
structure. As shown in the results, if the gyroscope data is not
used before IMU initialization, performance is significantly
harmed. The gyroscope data is in fact so useful that using
the gyroscope data alone (without ever initializing the IMU)
achieves great results on most sequences. However, without
the accelerometer data to constrain it, there is sometimes a
sudden irrecoverable jump in tracking error (something that
could perhaps be addressed with a dynamics prior).
Running our method without modeling motion blur or
rolling shutter (i.e., using a single raster per each render) per-
forms surprisingly well on the MO and MI sequences, though
it fails on the FO and FI sequences. The learned pixel-wise
FPN seems to be one of the most essential components of

<!-- page 19 -->
Table 4. SLAM parameter values.
Description
Value
Trajectory
Spline order for the positions and rotations (k)
4
Knot interval for the positions and rotations (∆tc)
∼8 milliseconds (half the frame period)
Learning rates for the position and rotation control points
1 × 10−3, 1 × 10−4
Number of predicted poses used in spline fitting (Nq)
10 per knot in the time range of the predictions
IMU Parameters & Loss
Learning rate for the gyro. and accel. biases
1 × 10−3
Loss coefficients for the gyro. and accel. residuals (λg, λa)
1 × 10−2, 1 × 10−4
Loss coefficients for the gyro. and accel. residuals during relocalization (λg, λa)
5 × 10−4, 5 × 10−6
Loss coefficient for the gyro. and accel. biases (λbias)
1 × 10−1
Gaussians
Initial Opacity
0.1
Learning rates for the opacities, intensities, means, scales, and quaternions
5 × 10−2, 2.5 × 10−3, 1.6 × 10−3, 5 × 10−3, 1 × 10−3
Rendering
Image downsample factor
4
Number of rasters per render (Nr)
5
Maximum integration interval (Tb)
36 milliseconds
Spline order for the pixel-wise and scalar FPN components
2
Knot intervals for pixel-wise and scalar FPN components
30 seconds, 5 seconds
Learning rates for the pixel-wise and scalar FPN control points
1 × 10−4, 1 × 10−4
Loss coefficient for the pixel-wise FPN component (λFPN)
1 × 10−3
System Initialization
Number of Gaussians created for map initialization (Ninit)
10k
Number of iterations for map initialization optimization (Niter,init)
1k
Tracking & Keyframe Selection
Maximum number of iterations for tracking optimization (Niter,track)
100
Convergence thresholds for position and rotation
1 × 10−4 (relative scale), 1 × 10−4 radians
Alpha threshold used to determine valid pixels in median depth computation
0.95
Translation thresholds used in selecting new keyframes (min and max)
0.02, 0.07 (both normalized by the median depth in the current frame)
Intersection over union threshold used in selecting new keyframes
0.90
Keyframe window size (|WK|, Nwindow)
6
Mapping
Maximum number of Gaussians created for a new keyframe (Nmax)
5k
Alpha threshold used to determine candidate pixels for back projection in Gaussian creation
0.95
Candidate pixel fraction threshold, below which Gaussian creation is skipped
0.02
Number of iterations for mapping optimization (Niter,map)
80
Number of randomly sampled keyframes (|SK|)
4
Loss coefficients for the keyframe window and randomly sampled keyframes in mapping (λs, λw)
2, 0.33
Factor applied to the gradients of the position and rotation control points in the keyframe window
10
Relocalization SSIM threshold
0.92
Densification & Pruning
Densification and pruning period
2k mapping iterations
Condition number threshold, above which Gaussian opacities are reset
8 (applied to the natural log of the condition number)
Opacity threshold, below which Gaussians are pruned
0.01
Image plane gradient threshold, above which Gaussians will be split or duplicated
4 × 10−4 (normalized, as described in Sec. E)
3D scale threshold, above which Gaussians are split and below which they are duplicated
0.01 (relative scale)
3D scale threshold, above which Gaussians are pruned
0.1 (relative scale)
IMU Initialization & Updates
Time (since the first frame) at which to perform IMU initialization
10 seconds
Rate at which keyframe poses are sampled for use in IMU initialization and updates
2 Hz
Number of iterations for trajectory smoothing after IMU initialization
400
IMU update period
10 seconds
Warmup
Delay before B-spline extension involves fitting to predicted poses
2 keyframes
Delay before motion blur and rolling shutter are modeled in rendering
20 keyframes
Delay before view-diversity-based opacity resetting is performed
40 keyframes
Delay before relocalization is enabled
150 keyframes

<!-- page 20 -->
Table 5. Ablation study results.
Ablation Method
SO
MO
FO
SI
MI
FI
ATE
(cm)
# of Trials
Completed
ATE
(cm)
# of Trials
Completed
ATE
(cm)
# of Trials
Completed
ATE
(cm)
# of Trials
Completed
ATE
(cm)
# of Trials
Completed
ATE
(cm)
# of Trials
Completed
Monocular*
22.5
3
×
0
×
0
7.9
3
×
0
×
0
No Gyro. Before IMU Init.
51.8
3
32.6
1
18.0
3
10.2
3
8.3
3
×
0
Gyroscope Only*
3.6
3
5.7
3
3.7
3
3.3
3
4.6
1
×
0
No Roll/Blur Modeling
9.0
3
7.3
3
32.8
1
4.2
3
5.7
3
×
0
No Pixel-wise FPN
22.7
3
×
0
×
0
52.1
1
×
0
×
0
No Keyframe Weighting
9.0
3
91.8
3
3.3
3
4.0
3
×
0
×
0
No Opacity Resetting
14.6
3
12.8
2
3.5
3
6.6
3
9.4
3
×
0
No Relocalization
12.3
3
4.8
1
2.3
3
6.6
3
3.9
2
×
0
With Onboard Filters
14.0
3
4.2
3
2.4
3
3.7
3
×
0
×
0
TRGS-SLAM
12.7
3
5.5
3
2.4
3
6.4
3
3.9
3
4.2
3
* Poses are relative scale and Sim(3) alignment is used in evaluation.
× No trials were successfully completed.
our method, as disabling it yields failure in most sequences
and poor results in others. Keyframe weighting in mapping,
view-diversity-based opacity resetting, and relocalization are
important in some sequences, but not all. However, the view-
diversity-based opacity resetting significantly reduces the
number of Gaussians, even when it isn’t pivotal to accurate
tracking (e.g., in the fast outdoor sequence the final num-
ber of Guassians is ∼34k with view-diversity-based opacity
resetting and ∼120k without).
The last method in the ablation study, ”With Onboard
Filters”, corresponds to running our method on the second
FLIR ADK camera in the TRNeRF dataset, which had on-
board noise filters enabled. The noise filters have no apparent
impact on performance in the outdoor sequences where FPN
is less prominent. In the indoor sequences they have an
inconsistent effect. Our method runs without issue on the
SI sequence. However, on the MI and FI sequences our
method fails immediately. Note that all sequences begin
with medium speed motion intended to aid IMU initializa-
tion, so the difference in performance between the SI and
MI/FI sequences is not explained by their different cam-
era speeds later in the sequences. This appears to suggest
that these filters can enter a state in which they introduce
significant multi-view inconsistency that violates the pre-
cise camera modeling our method relies on. As these filters
are enabled by default, this may have implications to many
thermal datasets collected with the same or similar cameras.
Finally, we note that only our full proposed method is
able to succeed on the FI sequence.
J. Additional Timing Analysis
Table 6 gives a breakdown of timing in the MI sequence.
Note that the timing data is presented hierarchically, with
the indentation of the task names used to represent their
parent-child relationships. Tracking runs for all 9654 frames,
while mapping runs for each of the 2111 frames selected
as keyframes (after system initialization). Mapping takes
much longer to run than tracking, and consumes the most
time overall. Within tracking, B-spline extension consumes
a modest percentage of the computation time, but the bulk
of the time is spent in the optimization loop. In mapping,
the optimization loop completely dominates. Optimization
runs for an average of 32 iterations in tracking and 83 iter-
ations in mapping. Note that mapping is typically run for
exactly 80 iterations, but is occasionally run for more when
densification and pruning occurs and the iteration counter is
reset. The computation time is spread quite evenly across
the individual components of the optimization loops in both
tracking and mapping, so there are no clear bottlenecks.
K. Limitations
While our method demonstrates a unique capability to op-
erate on the challenging TRNeRF dataset [7], it also has
several limitations. Our random keyframe sampling scheme
assumes a small scale scene, such that the randomly sam-
pled keyframes will often have fields of view that overlap
with the keyframe window. Similarly, our relocalization ap-
proach assumes a limited amount of drift, such that tracking
is able to converge to the correct solution. These limitations
could potentially be addressed by creating multiple submaps
in large scale scenes, restricting the random sampling to
the current submap, and performing place recognition and
loop closure between submaps (similar to LoopSplat [63]).
Additionally, in our testing we rescaled the 16-bit thermal
images with hardcoded thresholds. In real online operation
good thresholds are unlikely to be known apriori. This could
be addressed by dynamically setting these thresholds and
correspondingly making dynamic adjustments to the Gaus-
sians’ intensities and the learned FPN estimates. Also, in
our current implementation the IMU biases are assumed con-
stant. For long-term operation the biases would be better
represented as slowly varying splines, similar to our imple-
mentation of FPN.
Additionally, our method is sensitive to features com-
monly enabled in thermal cameras, such as onboard noise
filters and AGC. This is not an issue if these features are dis-

<!-- page 21 -->
Table 6. Timing analysis on the MI sequence.
Task
Avg. Time Per Run (ms)
× Avg. Number of
Runs per Parent Task
% of
Parent
Task
Tracking
193.27 × 9654
36.9
B-Spline Extension
27.32
14.1
Optimization Iteration
5.12 × 32
84.8
Rendering
1.88
36.8
Pose Evaluation
0.60
31.7
Rasterization
0.57
30.1
Blending & FPN
0.67
35.3
Loss Computation
0.75
14.3
Image Loss
0.08
11.0
IMU Loss
0.64
84.4
Backward Pass
1.22
23.1
Trajectory Optimizer Updates
1.05
19.9
Mapping
1469.39 × 2111
61.3
Gaussian Creation
0.63
0.04
Optimization Iteration
17.55 × 83
99.5
Rendering
3.06
17.4
Pose Evaluation
0.64
20.9
Rasterization
1.63
53.4
Blending & FPN
0.73
24.0
Loss Computation
1.56
8.9
Image Loss
0.20
12.9
FPN Loss
0.35
22.7
IMU Loss
0.98
63.2
Backward Pass
4.92
28.1
Gradient Modification
1.49
8.5
Optimizer Updates
2.90
16.5
Gaussian Updates
0.72
24.8
FPN Updates
0.81
27.9
Trajectory Updates
1.35
46.7
Densification
2.90
16.5
abled, but it does pose a potential issue with existing datasets
that had these features enabled or with thermal cameras that
do not expose the option to disable them. This issue could
be potentially addressed by expanding the image formation
model assumed by our method to incorporate these effects.
Similarly, our method does not have a strategy for dealing
with shutter-based NUCs, which both interrupt the image
stream and cause abrupt changes to onboard FPN corrections.
However, as mentioned in Sec. 5, it would be interesting to
see if our method of estimating FPN could obviate the need
for shutter-based NUCs in long-term operation. Finally, we
note that these issues could also be mitigated on the manu-
facturer’s side: if the cameras report the necessary metadata
to fully reconstruct the image processing pipeline (e.g., NUC
tables) these onboard operations would no longer be sources
of uncertainty in camera modeling.
