<!-- page 1 -->
RWT-SLAM: Robust Visual SLAM for Weakly Textured Environments
Qihao Peng, Zhiyu Xiang∗, Xijun Zhao, YuanGang Fan, Tengqi Zhao
Abstract— As a fundamental task for intelligent robots, visual
SLAM has made significant progress in recent years. However, ro-
bust SLAM in weakly textured environments remains challenging
due to the difficulty of extracting reliable features. In this paper,
we present a novel visual SLAM system named RWT-SLAM to
address this problem. Unlike existing methods that use detector-
based deep networks for interest point detection, we propose ex-
tracting distinctive features from a detector-free based network,
namely LoFTR, to avoid the difficulty of manual annotations of
feature points in weakly textured images. We generate multi-
level feature vectors from LoFTR to form dense descriptors for
each pixel in the input image. A keypoint localization component
is then proposed to measure the saliency of the descriptors
and select the distinctive pixels as keypoints. We integrate this
new keypoint into the popular ORB-SLAM framework and
compare it with state-of-the-art methods. Extensive experiments
on popular TUM RGB-D, OpenLORIS-Scene, as well as our own
dataset are carried out. The results demonstrate the superior
performance of our method in weakly textured environments.
I. INTRODUCTION
Visual Simultaneous Localization and Mapping (SLAM) is
an essential task for robot navigation. While feature-based
SLAM algorithms are popular for their high performance and
efficiency, they have great difficulty surviving weakly textured
environments. Traditional hand-crafted features like SIFT [1],
ORB [2], and Harris corners [3] struggle to extract reliable
keypoints in such low-texture areas. Some solutions have been
proposed to enhance feature matching by incorporating line
or plane features, such as Stereo-PLSLAM [4] and Structure-
SLAM [5]. However, these methods heavily depend on visible
structures like object edges and planes, and tracking may still
fail in environments with little structure and texture.
On the other hand, there is a trend towards replacing hand-
crafted features with deep features to improve the robustness of
the SLAM system. Trained with a large amount of diversified
data, SuperPoint [6] can produce more distinctive descriptors
than classical methods. GCN [7] uses a recurrent neural
network to produce keypoints for camera motion estimation.
GCN-SLAM [8] simplifies the GCN network for efficiency
and incorporates the learned features into ORB-SLAM2 [9].
This work was supported in part by the NSFC-Zhejiang Joint Fund for the
Integration of Industrialization and Informatization under Grant U1709214, in
part by the Key Research & Development Plan of Zhejiang Province under
Grant 2021C01196, and in part by the Fund of Science and Technology on
Aerospace Flight Dynamics Laboratory under Grant 2022-JYAPAF-F1027.
(Corresponding author: Zhiyu Xiang.)
Qihao Peng, YuanGang Fan, and Tengqi Zhao are with the College
of Information Science & Electronic Engineering, Zhejiang University,
Hangzhou 310027, China (e-mail: 22031083@zju.edu.cn; ygfan@zju.edu.cn;
tqzhao@zju.edu.cn).
Zhiyu Xiang is with the Zhejiang Provincial Key Laboratory of Information
Processing, Communication and Networking, Zhejiang University, Hangzhou
310027, China (e-mail: xiangzy@zju.edu.cn).
Xijun Zhao is with the China North Vehicle Research Institute, Beijing
100072, China (e-mail: heejunzhao@163.com).
These methods require ground-truth or pseudo-ground-truth
keypoint annotations to train the network. However, obtaining
such annotations in low-texture scenarios can be extremely
difficult, limiting the performance of these methods in such
scenarios.
Recently, some detector-free methods [10][11] have been
proposed to predict point correspondences between images,
eliminating the need for explicit keypoint detection. These
methods can be easily trained with dense point matchings pro-
duced by ground-truth camera pose transformations and depth
maps. With the large attentive field provided by Transformer
[12], they can produce dense pixel-level matches for low-
texture images. However, detector-free methods lack explicit
descriptors for the matched points, and the matches across
neighboring image pairs are usually different, which makes
feature tracking among successive frames impossible. On the
other hand, modern SLAM systems like ORB-SLAM2 rely
on feature descriptors to match feature points to a local map
and use the PnP algorithm to produce good initial poses. They
further utilize repeated point observations for pose and map
optimization, which is crucial for maintaining the accuracy of
SLAM.
In this paper, we propose a robust SLAM algorithm, namely
RWT-SLAM (Robust SLAM for Weak-Textured environ-
ments), for weakly textured environments with RGB-D input.
Our algorithm is based on the detector-free feature matching
network LoFTR. We believe that the strong capability of
feature extraction in low-texture areas can be very beneficial
for SLAM. Instead of directly employing LoFTR for point
matching, we use it for feature point and descriptor generation.
We duplicate the current image as the input of the network and
extract feature vectors from the coarse and fine-level matching
stages of LoFTR to form dense descriptors for each pixel of
the image. A keypoint localization module is then proposed
to evaluate the distinctiveness of the point and select those
with the highest distinctiveness as keypoints. We integrate
the new features into the popular ORB-SLAM framework
and demonstrate its promising performance in various weakly
textured environments. The main contributions of this paper
are:
• A novel visual SLAM algorithm that can robustly run in
weakly textured environments is proposed. To the best of
our knowledge, it is the first visual SLAM algorithm that
can achieve successful tracking in all sequences labeled
as ”no structure” or ”no texture” in the TUM RGB-D
dataset [13].
• An effective keypoint that can work reliably in weakly
textured environments is proposed. Built upon LoFTR,
the keypoint has highly discriminative descriptors and
salient locations for repeatable matching across multiple
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed

<!-- page 2 -->
images.
• Comprehensive experiments have been conducted on the
public TUM RGB-D [13], OpenLORIS-Scene [14], and
our own dataset. The results demonstrate RWT-SLAM’s
superior robustness in weakly textured environments.
II. RELATED WORKS
A. Feature Extraction and Matching
Before the advent of deep learning, many hand-crafted
feature extraction and matching methods, such as ORB [2]
and SIFT [1], have demonstrated impressive success in visual
SLAM under general scenes. However, their performances are
greatly restricted when dealing with degenerated cases such
as low-texture scenarios. With features learned from large
data, deep learning based feature extraction and matching
methods can usually achieve better performance than the
traditional ones, while at the cost of more computational
complexity. They can be roughly categorized into two groups:
detector-based and detector-free. Detector-based methods fo-
cus on learning to generate keypoints and their descrip-
tors [6][15][16][17]for each image, which typically involve
detecting, describing, and matching. They usually require
ground-truth keypoint annotations, which are only feasible for
richly textured scenes. The detector-free methods eliminate
the keypoint detection step and produce point correspondences
directly for a pair of images. NCNet [18] and DRC-Net [19]
utilize 4D cost volumes to explore all possible matches be-
tween two images. Recently, some Transformer-based methods
have come up [11][20][21]. They have a strong capability in
capturing both global context and local details, which makes
them more effective in producing reliable point matching
under challenging conditions. LoFTR [11] can produce dense
matches in complex environments, even in weakly structured
or textured conditions. Matchformer [20] and ASPNFormer
[21] make further improvements upon LoFTR. Along with
the impressive feature matching performance, the detector-
free methods lack explicit representation of the descriptors
and definition of keypoints, which makes them not applicable
to modern geometric-based SLAM. Inspired by the impressive
performance of LoFTR in weakly textured environments, we
transform it into a keypoint extraction module and integrate it
into the classical SLAM pipeline to improve the robustness of
SLAM.
B. Visual SLAM
Traditional visual SLAM algorithms can be roughly divided
into two categories: direct (photometric-based) [22][23] and
in-direct (feature-based) [9][24]. Direct methods estimate mo-
tion from photometric changes in the image, while indirect
methods use a subset of image features. DSO [23] is a direct
and sparse method that builds a sparse 3D environment map
while tracking camera motion. ORB-SLAM [24], a classical
indirect method, uses ORB [2] features and integrates them in
three modules, i.e., feature tracking, local mapping, and loop
closing. In-between the two categories, SVO [25] is a semi-
direct method that merges the strengths of both feature-based
and photometric-based approaches for fast and robust motion
estimation. In comparison to the indirect [24] and semi-direct
[25] counterparts, direct methods usually perform better in
weakly textured scenes. However, they are more sensitive to
illumination changes of the scene and usually require a higher
frame rate to keep tracking the pixels.
C. Deep Learning Based Visual SLAM
Recently, some studies have used deep learning methods to
replace one or more modules in traditional SLAM systems
[26][27][28][29][8][30]. For example, CNN-SLAM [26] and
DS-SLAM [27] introduce a depth estimation network and
a semantic segmentation network, respectively, to achieve
better localization accuracy. The methods most similar to ours
are SuperPoint-SLAM [30], GCN-SLAM [8], and DXSLAM
[28]. SuperPoint-SLAM [30] and GCN-SLAM [8] replace
ORB [2] features in ORB-SLAM2 [9] with keypoints and
descriptors generated by neural networks called SuperPoint[6]
and GCNv2 [8], respectively. DXSLAM [28] uses keypoint
features generated by a pretrained hierarchical network to
improve the system’s performance. Being detector-based net-
works, these methods have the common drawback of being
unable to detect sufficient reliable keypoints in weakly textured
images, since they are trained to detect only distinctive features
in common scenes with at least median texture. Moreover, it is
also unrealistic to provide manually annotated feature points
for training the network to learn extracting feature points in
weakly textured images.
Other works have attempted to train end-to-end SLAM sys-
tems [31][32]. However, most of these efforts have focused on
small-scale dense 3D reconstruction with a few frames. They
usually lack key components of modern SLAM systems such
as loop closure, which constrains their accuracy. Recently,
DeepSLAM [33] integrates three sub-networks to imitate full
SLAM modules, while NICE-SLAM [34] employs implicit
neural representations for scene reconstruction. Although they
achieve good performance in lots of environments, these end-
to-end SLAM network models can be regarded as a full black
box, lacking the internal clarity that the traditional SLAM
pipeline has. The generalization problem is also another issue,
i.e., they may perform unexpectedly poorly in some previously
unseen environments. Our method integrates the deep learning
based feature matching network LoFTR into the classical
SLAM pipeline. It achieves high robustness in weakly textured
environments, while maintaining the clarity and accuracy the
traditional SLAM has.
LoFTR
Dense Descriptors Generation
Keypoint Localization
ORB-SLAM Framework 
Integration
Keypoint Extraction
Fig. 1.
The system diagram of RTW-SLAM.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed

<!-- page 3 -->
…
coarse 
features 
processing
coarse-level
matching
 
 
 
 
256×1
 
 
 
 
cropping
  
 
  
 
  
 
  
 
fine 
features 
processing
fine-level 
matching
 
 
  
 
 
  
 
 
  ,   
 
 
  
 
 
  
…
a coarse-level match
fine-level 
match
384×1
  
 
LoFTR
Keypoints and 
descriptors
interpolation
reshape
128×1
Keypoint localization
 W
H
384
D
Dense descriptors
Keypoints and sparse descriptors
 
 
local score
channel score
 W
H
384
fine-level
descriptor
coarse-level
descriptor
 
Fig. 2.
LoFTR-based keypoint extraction pipeline. Coarse and fine-level feature maps are pulled out of the LoFTR with bilinear interpolation and concatenated
together to construct the descriptors, producing dense descriptors for each pixel in the original image. Then, keypoint localization is used to select keypoints
with highly salient descriptors.
III. METHOD
In this section, we first give a brief overview of our system.
Then the components of the proposed keypoint extraction
method are described in detail. At last, the integration of the
new feature point into the SLAM system is introduced.
A. System Overview
As shown in Fig. 1, our RWT-SLAM system consists of two
parts: Keypoint Extraction and SLAM Integration. In the first
part, multi-level feature vectors are pulled out from LoFTR
to create dense descriptors for every pixel in the input image.
Then the keypoint localization is applied to select distinctive
pixels as keypoints. Finally, the new keypoints are integrated
into the widely used ORB-SLAM framework to improve the
system’s robustness in weakly textured scenes.
B. LoFTR
For completeness, we provide a brief introduction of LoFTR
here. More details can be found in [11]. Given two images IA
and IB acquired at the same scene, LoFTR establishes coarse-
level matches and then refines them to the fine-scale in a
coarse-to-fine scheme. The network consists of four stages,
as shown in the left part of Fig. 2:
1. Multi-level features are extracted from IA and IB using
a pyramid CNN. The coarse-level features, denoted as
ˆFA and ˆFB, are 1/8 of the original image size, while the
fine-level features, denoted as ˜FA and ˜FB, are 1/2 of the
size.
2. Coarse-level features are concatenated with positional
encodings and then passed to a Transformer block for
feature processing.
3. Based on the transformed features ˆF
′
A and ˆF
′
B, the match-
ing score matrix is computed by taking the inner product
of corresponding feature vectors from
ˆF
′
A and
ˆF
′
B for
all positions. A dual-softmax operator is then applied
to the score matrix to obtain the matching probability.
The output is a coarse-level matching set
 ˆi, ˆj

that
satisfies mutual nearest neighbor consistency and whose
confidence is above a threshold.
4. The fine-level features are cropped around the coarse-
level matches and then fed into another transformer block.
The resulting features ˜Fs
A and ˜Fs
B are used to compute fine
matches from ˆi to a subpixel position of ˜j.
C. Dense descriptor generation
LoFTR [11] can directly produce dense point matches for a
pair of images. However, these points lack explicit descriptors
and repetition across multiple images, which creates problems
for adaptation in visual SLAM. To overcome this, we propose
to produce dense descriptors for each pixel and then localize
the keypoints by selecting the most distinctive ones. To this
end, we duplicate the current frame and concatenate them at
the channel dimension as the input to LoFTR, to generate
dense feature descriptors for each pixel.
A descriptor at a pixel i(u,v) in the image is composed
of specific feature vectors from the network’s coarse and
fine-matching stages. As we duplicate and concatenate the
current frame at the channel dimension, the two transformed
coarse features are roughly equivalent. As shown in Fig. 2,
we take the transformed coarse features ˆF
′
A to create coarse-
level descriptors. We reshape ˆF
′
A into a feature map with a
1/8 scale of the original image and 256 channels, and use
bilinear interpolation at the pixel i to generate the coarse-
level descriptor fˆi ∈R256. As for the fine-level descriptor
in position i, the fine feature vector of ˜Fs
A used to compute
sub-pixel matches is selected, denoting as f˜i ∈R128. Finally,
by concatenating the coarse and fine-level descriptors, the
complete hierarchical descriptors that capture both high and
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed

<!-- page 4 -->
low-level textures of the pixel i can be obtained and recorded
as:
fi = fˆi ⊕f˜i
∈R384.
(1)
We generate a descriptor for each pixel, producing dense
descriptors with the same resolution as the original image.
D. Keypoint Localization
Although dense descriptors have been obtained for each
pixel, not all of the pixels are suitable to act as the keypoints
who should have repeatable matching capability across mul-
tiple images. We propose calculating saliency scores in the
dense descriptor map to localize the final keypoints. Similar
to SIFT’s DoG response maps [1], each channel of the dense
descriptors Dk (k = 1,...,384) is regarded as a saliency map
for feature point localization.
We believe that keypoints should exhibit high values both
locally and across different channels in the saliency maps. To
generate a soft score map of keypoints, we first calculate the
local score on a specific feature map k with the equation:
αk
uv =
exp
 Dk
uv

∑(u′,v′)∈N (u,v) exp
 Dk
u′v′
,
(2)
where N (u,v) is the 9 local neighbors centered around
the pixel (u,v). Then we define the channel score β k
uv by
performing normalization along the channel:
β k
uv = Dk
uv/max
t
Dt
uv.
(3)
Considering both the local and the channel scores, we get a
combined score for each pixel by taking the maximum value
of the product of both scores across all channels k:
γuv = max
k

αk
uvβ k
uv

.
(4)
Finally, the saliency score suv at position (u,v) is obtained by
performing normalization over all pixels as:
suv = γuv/ ∑
(u′,v′)
γu′v′.
(5)
We only retain the pixels with top 5% highest saliency
scores as keypoint candidates and then use non-maximum
suppression within a 9 × 9 local window to determine the
final positions of the keypoints. Fig. 3 shows the example
images from the TUM RGB-D dataset, together with their
corresponding saliency score maps and keypoint matches. We
can see that our method can produce highly reliable matches
for weakly textured images.
E. System integration
With the new keypoint in hand, we integrate it into the
classical feature point based SLAM framework ORB-SLAM.
We simply replace the ORB feature with our new LoFTR-
based keypoint. The detailed system pipeline of the resulting
RWT-SLAM is illustrated in Fig. 4. The current frame is
duplicated and concatenated along the channel dimension
before being fed into LoFTR to generate keypoints. Apart from
replacing the feature points, some improvements are also made
Fig. 3.
Visualization of the saliency maps and the generated keypoints. The
first two rows, from left to right, show the images, saliency maps, top 5%
saliency score maps, and the generated keypoints. The last row displays the
keypoint matching results for successive input images in fr3 sequences from
the TUM RGB-D dataset.
System
Initialization
Pose Prediction
Relocalization
Track Local  Map
New Keyframe
Detection
Keypoints
Descriptors
KF
LocalMapping
Detect
Loop
Sim3
Full BA
KNN
KNN
KNN
LoFTR-Based Feature Extraction
Descriptors
Vocabulary 
Tree Training
Frame
Keypoint 
Localization
Dense
Descriptors
Fig. 4.
The detailed system pipeline of RWT-SLAM.
to the ORB-SLAM framework to enhance the adaptability of
the feature to extreme conditions.
KNN searching in tracking. In ORB-SLAM2 [9], the
motion estimation is achieved by frame-to-frame keypoints
tracking and pose-only bundle adjustment. Once the keypoints
and the descriptors are obtained, the system relies on a
progressive method for frame-to-frame tracking. The keypoints
of the previous frame are projected to the current frame
with the assumption of constant velocity, and matches are
searched within a local region. If that fails, the system will
try to find matches using bag of words (BoW) among the
current frame and the referenced keyframes. In the situation of
low texture, accurate point matching becomes more difficult
and the velocity is not as accurate as in normal conditions.
Therefore, in our system we replace these two matching
strategies with a standard K nearest neighbor (KNN) search
followed by a ratio test. The KNN matcher is capable of
establishing more stable matches among the descriptors than
the original matching strategies.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed

<!-- page 5 -->
TABLE I
ATE RMSE ON THE TUM RGB-D DATASET
sequences
ORB-SLAM2
SuperPoint-SLAM
GCN-SLAM
DXSLAM
Structure-SLAM
DSO
RWT-SLAM
rich texture
fr1 desk
0.016m
0.013m
0.029m
-
-
0.115m
0.046m
fr1 xyz
0.022m
0.010m
0.011m
0.017m
-
0.058m
0.024m
fr2 desk
0.040m
0.160m
0.014m
0.113m
-
0.173m
0.038m
fr2 xyz
0.009m
0.006m
0.004m
0.003m
-
0.010m
0.111m
low texture
fr3 cabinet
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.091m
fr3 large cabinet
-
0.037m
0.070m
-
0.111m
0.056m
fr3 str notex far
0.037m
0.036m
0.029m
-
0.281m
0.156m
0.033m
fr3 str notex near
-
-
-
-
0.065m
0.501m
0.019m
fr3 nostr notex far
-
-
0.086m
-
-
-
0.057m
fr3 nostr notex near
-
-
-
-
-
-
0.056m
Vocabulary rebuilding. A visual vocabulary is trained
offline to produce BoW in ORB-SLAM2 to accelerate the
matching process during tracking, relocalization, and loop
closure. Based on our new LoFTR-based descriptors, we
rebuild a new visual vocabulary under the DBoW3 framework
upon the Bovisa 2008-09-01 [35] dataset. The vocabulary is
produced in binary form, which is efficient for use during
system initialization and image matching.
IV. EXPERIMENTS
We validate the system’s accuracy and lifetime performance
on various datasets including TUM RGB-D, OpenLORIS-
Scene, and our own dataset. The low-texture sequences of
these datasets are challenging to most existing visual SLAM
algorithms. Similar to GCN-SLAM and DXSLAM, currently
our system operates only in RGB-D mode. We use the
pretrained LoFTR model to generate keypoints and descriptors
on a GPU. We then feed the saved keypoints and descriptors
to the SLAM system. All experiments are conducted on a
computer with an Intel i7-10700K CPU and an NVIDIA 1650
GPU.
Fig. 5.
Qualitative results on fr3 cabinet (top), fr3 str notex far (middle),
and fr3 nostr notex near (below) sequences. From left to right: the tracked
keypoints, constructed 3D maps, and estimated trajectories with ATE.
A. Experiments on the TUM RGB-D dataset
The TUM RGB-D dataset is a popular dataset with precise
ground truth acquired from a motion capture system, making it
ideal for evaluating localization accuracy. Apart from using six
sequences in fr3 with weak or no texture for testing, we also
select four sequences from fr1 and fr2 with rich textures for
performance comparison. Besides the baseline ORB-SLAM2,
our methods are compared with some other similar methods.
SuperPoint-SLAM [30], GCN-SLAM [8], and DXSLAM [28]
are both based on the ORB-SLAM2 [9] framework and
employ learned features at the front end. Structure-SLAM [5]
introduces line and plane features to deal with the low-texture
problem. DSO [23] is a direct sparse method that usually
has better performance than indirect methods. We adopt the
absolute trajectory error (ATE) as the performance metric.
The results for ORB-SLAM2 [9], GCN-SLAM [8], DXSLAM
[28], and Structure-SLAM [5] are just from their published
papers, while the results for SuperPoint-SLAM [30] and DSO
[23] are generated by running the source code. All methods
are run in RGB-D mode, except for DSO [23], which is a
monocular direct method.
The quantitative results are presented in Table I. It can be
seen that our method is the only one that successfully tracks
all the sequences listed in the table. In particular, to the best of
our knowledge, ours is the first visual SLAM algorithm that
can survive all of the low-texture sequences in fr3. Comparing
with the richly textured input, our method is immune to the
low-texture problem and able to produce stable localization
results in these sequences. The baseline ORB-SLAM2 has a
good performance in richly textured scenes but can hardly
survive low-texture inputs. With the help of learned feature
points, GCN-SLAM obtains improved performance in low-
texture sequences over ORB-SLAM2. Structure-SLAM and
DSO perform similarly to GCN-SLAM in the sense of being
alive only on parts of low-texture sequences. In contrast, our
RWT-SLAM is highly reliable in these extreme environments,
and its localization performance is also superior to most of the
methods. On the other hand, we notice that in scenes with rich
textures like fr1 and fr2, the localization accuracy of RWT-
SLAM is a little lower than GCN-SLAM. This is due to the
fact that our keypoint is only localized at the pixel level, not
at the sub-pixel level as GCN-SLAM does. Fig. 5 qualitatively
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed

<!-- page 6 -->
illustrates the tracked keypoints, the constructed 3D maps, as
well as the estimated trajectories on three of these low-texture
sequences.
B. Experiments on the OpenLORIS-Scene Dataset
The OpenLORIS-Scene dataset includes five scenes: office,
corridor, home, cafe, and market. These scenes are challenging
for most visual SLAM algorithms due to the existence of
featureless walls and low illumination. The success rate CR∞
and the ATE error of the successful trajectory are used as
evaluation metrics. Our RWT-SLAM algorithm is compared
against the baseline ORB-SLAM2 as well as other state-
of-the-art methods. As an IMU-enhanced version of ORB-
SLAM2, ORB-SLAM3 [36] is also introduced and run in
RGB-D mode for comparison, since IMU data is provided in
the OpenLORIS-Scene dataset. The results are shown in Fig.
6, where we can see that RWT-SLAM has the longest tracking
life in all scenes. In particular, RWT-SLAM outperforms the
second-best GCN-SLAM by 24.94% and 63.23% in CR∞
in the weakest-textured corridor and home scenes, respec-
tively. Interestingly, ORB-SLAM3 does not perform better
than ORB-SLAM2 in most sequences despite the assistance
of IMU, which may be due to the difficulty in initializing
IMU in these environments. As for the averaged trajectory
accuracy among the successfully tracked frames, RWT-SLAM
does not perform the best. This can be attributed to two
reasons: (1) there are many turns in these weakly textured
scenes, leading to increased rotation and translation errors;
and (2) our LoFTR-based feature point is not extracted at the
sub-pixel level. Anyway, the longer lifetime is the main focus
of our work.
C. Qualitative Results on Our Own Dataset
To further demonstrate the performance of RWT-SLAM in
real weakly textured areas, we use an Intel RealSense D455
RGB-D camera to capture four low-texture sequences under
various conditions: a) walking down a corridor, making a
180-degree turn at the end, and walking back; b) entering
a room with featureless floor and walls; c) walking on a
road outdoors and forming a closed loop at the end; d)
climbing up and down stairs, returning to the starting point.
These testing sequences are named Corridor, Room, Outdoor
road, and Stairs, respectively. Since there is no ground truth
available, these experiments serve as supplementary testing in
challenging real-world scenarios. We compare our system with
GCN-SLAM and ORB-SLAM2, and the estimated trajectories
are shown in Fig. 7. As depicted in Fig. 7a, ORB-SLAM2
fails to handle the 180-degree turn and loses track at the
top right of the trajectory. GCN-SLAM gives an incorrect
rotation prediction and deviates from the actual walking route,
whereas our system maintains reasonable tracking throughout
the sequence. In the room sequence, both the number of GCN-
v2 and ORB features decreases drastically when encountering
weakly textured walls and floors, leading to a large drift from
the end point marked red in Fig. 7b. In the Outdoor road
sequence, ORB-SLAM2 immediately loses tracking, while
GCN-SLAM fails at the third turn. RWT-SLAM is able to
complete the entire trajectory and perform a loop closure
correction at the end. Fig. 7d displays the robustness of RWT-
SLAM when handling images with large featureless regions
and motion blurs. In summary, our RWT-SLAM is the only
one that successfully navigates all four challenging sequences
with reasonable localization accuracy. The reconstructed dense
maps for the Outdoor road and Stairs sequences are shown in
Fig. 8.
D. Ablation Studies
We perform ablation experiments on the six weakly textured
sequences of fr3 from the TUM RGB-D dataset. For different
configurations of our method, we record the ratio of success-
fully tracked sequences and the average ATE in Table II. We
can see that RWT-SLAM with only coarse-level descriptors
Fig. 6.
Per-sequence results on the OpenLORIS-Scence dataset. Each black dot on the top line indicates the start point of one sequence in a scene. For each
algorithm, blue dots represent successful initialization and blue lines represent the duration of successful tracking. The percentage value on the top left of each
scene is the average correct rate CR∞, with larger meaning more robust. The average ATE RMSE (m) is on the bottom right, with smaller values meaning
more accurate.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed

<!-- page 7 -->
(a) Corridor
(b) Room
(c) Outdoor road
(d) Stairs
Fig. 7.
The estimated trajectories for RWT-SLAM, GCN-SLAM, and ORB-SLAM2 in our own dataset. We mark the starting and ending points of the
trajectory with a red star and a thick dot, respectively.
(a) Outdoor road
(b) Stairs
Fig. 8.
Dense reconstructions for the Outdoor road and Stairs sequences. The point cloud is obtained by projecting the keyframe’s depth maps along with
the estimated poses from RWT-SLAM.
TABLE II
ABLATION STUDIES OF RWT-SLAM. ATE RMSE ON THE TUM RGB-D DATASET.
coarse-level
descriptors
fine-level
descriptors
KNN
matcher
top 3%
saliency scores
top 5%
saliency scores
top 10%
saliency scores
top 20%
saliency scores
successful
tracking
average
ATE RMSE
(a)
✓
✓
✓
6/6
0.068m
(b)
✓
✓
✓
0/6
-
(c)
✓
✓
✓
6/6
0.107m
(d)
✓
✓
✓
✓
6/6
0.054m
(e)
✓
✓
✓
✓
6/6
0.059m
(f)
✓
✓
✓
✓
6/6
0.066m
RWT-SLAM
✓
✓
✓
✓
6/6
0.052m
TABLE III
ABLATION STUDIES OF THE KNN MATCHER. THE LIFETIME
PERFORMANCE ON CHALLENGING SEQUENCES.
corridor
home
our own
dataset
ORB-SLAM2(w.o. KNN)
24.9%
27.1%
43.7%
ORB-SLAM2(with KNN)
13.8%
11.3%
23.6%
RWT-SLAM(w.o. KNN)
37.5%
43.2%
85.7%
RWT-SLAM(with KNN)
55.1%
69.7%
100%
can handle all six sequences, but with lower localization
accuracy compared to the full configuration. On the other
hand, RWT-SLAM with fine-level descriptors alone failed in
all sequences. This is because the coarse-level descriptors have
a much larger receptive field than the fine-level ones, which is
vital for describing the overall texture of the pixel. The fine-
level descriptors have a very narrow receptive field, using them
alone can lead to ambiguous matching when facing low or
repetitively textured scenes. Combining both levels of features
for descriptor generation can meet the keypoint’s requirements
of distinctiveness and accuracy. We also investigated the
impact of the KNN matcher and the percentage scores in
determining keypoints. With the KNN matcher on, the average
ATE drops from 0.107m to 0.052m, decreasing by more than
50%. Meanwhile, retaining the points with top 5% saliency
scores as keypoints yields the best localization accuracy. To
further investigate the impact of the KNN matcher on tracking
robustness, we conducted a comparative analysis of tracking
lifetimes using challenging sequences from the Open-LoRIS
dataset (corridor and home) as well as our own dataset.
The results are presented in Table III. Interestingly, enabling
the KNN matcher in ORB-SLAM2 leads to a significant
degradation in tracking lifetime, whereas in the case of RWT-
SLAM, employing the KNN matcher results in a notable
improvement in tracking lifetime. A key factor contributing to
this difference is the high discriminativeness of LoFTR-based
descriptors in low-texture areas, which are specifically trained
with self- and cross-attention layers in Transformers. Instead,
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed

<!-- page 8 -->
the less discriminative ORB features suffers from much more
mismatches when using the exhaustive KNN, resulting the
degradation of lifetime performance.
E. Timing Results
The RWT-SLAM system relies on the LoFTR network
to create descriptors for each pixel, which hinders its real-
time performance. In our experiment, the inference time of
LoFTR on the GPU is approximately 0.52 seconds per image.
After going through the keypoint localization module, we
obtain around 2000 feature points per frame. Subsequently, the
entire SLAM process time on the CPU is approximately 0.04
seconds per frame, including feature matching, tracking and
pose optimization. Nevertheless, this is the first visual SLAM
work which can achieve robust performance in low textured
environments. Future hardware acceleration methods could be
explored to improve the real-time performance.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, a robust visual SLAM system built upon
Transformer-based deep features is proposed to deal with the
problem caused by weakly textured environments. Different
from the existing solutions that employ detector-based deep
features, we propose extracting salient keypoints upon multi-
level features from a detector-free feature matching network.
This strategy explicitly avoids the difficulties of manual an-
notations of keypoints on weakly textured images. The meth-
ods for dense multi-level descriptor generation and keypoint
localization are introduced in detail. The resulting keypoints
and the corresponding descriptors are very effective for es-
tablishing matches in weakly textured images. By integrating
this strong keypoint into the classical ORB-SLAM framework,
we construct the RTW-SLAM which can work robustly in
both normal and weakly textured scenes. The experiments on
various public datasets as well as our own data demonstrate
our success.
REFERENCES
[1] D. G. Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant keypoints,”
International Journal of Computer Vision (IJCV), vol. 60, no. 2, pp. 91–
110, 2004.
[2] E. Rublee, V. Rabaud, K. Konolige, and G. Bradski, “Orb: An efficient
alternative to sift or surf,” in ICCV, 2011, pp. 2564–2571.
[3] C. Harris, M. Stephens et al., “A combined corner and edge detector,”
in Alvey vision conference, 1988, pp. 10–5244.
[4] R. Gomez-Ojeda, F.-A. Moreno, D. Zuniga-No¨el, D. Scaramuzza, and
J. Gonzalez-Jimenez, “Pl-slam: A stereo slam system through the com-
bination of points and line segments,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 35, no. 3, pp. 734–746, 2019.
[5] Y. Li, N. Brasch, Y. Wang, N. Navab, and F. Tombari, “Structure-slam:
Low-drift monocular slam in indoor environments,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 5, no. 4, pp. 6583–6590, 2020.
[6] D. DeTone, T. Malisiewicz, and A. Rabinovich, “Superpoint: Self-
supervised interest point detection and description,” in CVPRW, 2018,
pp. 224–236.
[7] J. Tang, J. Folkesson, and P. Jensfelt, “Geometric correspondence
network for camera motion estimation,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
Letters, vol. 3, no. 2, pp. 1010–1017, 2018.
[8] J. Tang, L. Ericson, J. Folkesson, and P. Jensfelt, “Gcnv2: Efficient
correspondence prediction for real-time slam,” IEEE Robotics and
Automation Letters, vol. 4, no. 4, pp. 3505–3512, 2019.
[9] R. Mur-Artal and J. D. Tard´os, “Orb-slam2: An open-source slam
system for monocular, stereo, and rgb-d cameras,” IEEE Transactions
on Robotics, vol. 33, no. 5, pp. 1255–1262, 2017.
[10] W. Jiang, E. Trulls, J. Hosang, A. Tagliasacchi, and K. M. Yi, “Cotr:
Correspondence transformer for matching across images,” in ICCV,
2021, pp. 6207–6217.
[11] J. Sun, Z. Shen, Y. Wang, H. Bao, and X. Zhou, “Loftr: Detector-free
local feature matching with transformers,” in CVPR, 2021, pp. 8922–
8931.
[12] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer, N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A. N. Gomez,
Ł. Kaiser, and I. Polosukhin, “Attention is all you need,” NIPS, vol. 30,
2017.
[13] J. Sturm, N. Engelhard, F. Endres, W. Burgard, and D. Cremers, “A
benchmark for the evaluation of rgb-d slam systems,” in IROS.
IEEE,
2012, pp. 573–580.
[14] X. Shi, D. Li, P. Zhao, Q. Tian, Y. Tian, Q. Long, C. Zhu, J. Song,
F. Qiao, L. Song et al., “Are we ready for service robots? the openloris-
scene datasets for lifelong slam,” in ICRA. IEEE, 2020, pp. 3139–3145.
[15] M. Dusmanu, I. Rocco, T. Pajdla, M. Pollefeys, J. Sivic, A. Torii, and
T. Sattler, “D2-net: A trainable cnn for joint detection and description
of local features,” arXiv preprint arXiv:1905.03561, 2019.
[16] Z. Luo, L. Zhou, X. Bai, H. Chen, J. Zhang, Y. Yao, S. Li, T. Fang,
and L. Quan, “Aslfeat: Learning local features of accurate shape and
localization,” in CVPR, 2020, pp. 6589–6598.
[17] J. Lee, B. Kim, and M. Cho, “Self-supervised equivariant learning for
oriented keypoint detection,” in CVPR, 2022, pp. 4847–4857.
[18] I. Rocco, M. Cimpoi, R. Arandjelovi´c, A. Torii, T. Pajdla, and J. Sivic,
“Neighbourhood consensus networks,” NIPS, vol. 31, 2018.
[19] X. Li, K. Han, S. Li, and V. Prisacariu, “Dual-resolution correspondence
networks,” NIPS, vol. 33, 2020.
[20] Q. Wang, J. Zhang, K. Yang, K. Peng, and R. Stiefelhagen, “Match-
former: Interleaving attention in transformers for feature matching,” in
ACCV, 2022, pp. 2746–2762.
[21] H. Chen, Z. Luo, L. Zhou, Y. Tian, M. Zhen, T. Fang, D. McKinnon,
Y. Tsin, and L. Quan, “Aspanformer: Detector-free image matching with
adaptive span transformer,” in ECCV.
Springer, 2022, pp. 20–36.
[22] J. Engel, T. Sch¨ops, and D. Cremers, “Lsd-slam: Large-scale direct
monocular slam,” in ECCV.
Springer, 2014, pp. 834–849.
[23] J. Engel, V. Koltun, and D. Cremers, “Direct sparse odometry,” IEEE
Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine Intelligence, vol. 40,
no. 3, pp. 611–625, 2017.
[24] R. Mur-Artal, J. M. M. Montiel, and J. D. Tardos, “Orb-slam: a versatile
and accurate monocular slam system,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics,
vol. 31, no. 5, pp. 1147–1163, 2015.
[25] C. Forster, M. Pizzoli, and D. Scaramuzza, “Svo: Fast semi-direct
monocular visual odometry,” in ICRA.
IEEE, 2014, pp. 15–22.
[26] K. Tateno, F. Tombari, I. Laina, and N. Navab, “Cnn-slam: Real-time
dense monocular slam with learned depth prediction,” in CVPR, 2017,
pp. 6243–6252.
[27] C. Yu, Z. Liu, X.-J. Liu, F. Xie, Y. Yang, Q. Wei, and Q. Fei, “Ds-
slam: A semantic visual slam towards dynamic environments,” in IROS.
IEEE, 2018, pp. 1168–1174.
[28] D. Li, X. Shi, Q. Long, S. Liu, W. Yang, F. Wang, Q. Wei, and F. Qiao,
“Dxslam: A robust and efficient visual slam system with deep features,”
in IROS.
IEEE, 2020, pp. 4958–4965.
[29] X. Hu, Y. Zhang, Z. Cao, R. Ma, Y. Wu, Z. Deng, and W. Sun, “Cfp-
slam: A real-time visual slam based on coarse-to-fine probability in
dynamic environments,” in IROS.
IEEE, 2022, pp. 4399–4406.
[30] C. Deng, K. Qiu, R. Xiong, and C. Zhou, “Comparative study of deep
learning based features in slam,” in ACIRS.
IEEE, 2019, pp. 250–254.
[31] H. Zhou, B. Ummenhofer, and T. Brox, “Deeptam: Deep tracking and
mapping,” in ECCV, 2018, pp. 822–838.
[32] C. Liu, J. Gu, K. Kim, S. G. Narasimhan, and J. Kautz, “Neural rgb
(r) d sensing: Depth and uncertainty from a video camera,” in CVPR,
2019, pp. 10 986–10 995.
[33] R. Li, S. Wang, and D. Gu, “Deepslam: A robust monocular slam system
with unsupervised deep learning,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial
Electronics, vol. 68, no. 4, pp. 3577–3587, 2020.
[34] Z. Zhu, S. Peng, V. Larsson, W. Xu, H. Bao, Z. Cui, M. R. Oswald, and
M. Pollefeys, “Nice-slam: Neural implicit scalable encoding for slam,”
in CVPR, 2022, pp. 12 786–12 796.
[35] A. Bonarini, W. Burgard, G. Fontana, M. Matteucci, D. G. Sorrenti, J. D.
Tardos et al., “Rawseeds: Robotics advancement through web-publishing
of sensorial and elaborated extensive data sets,” in IROS.
IEEE, 2006,
p. 93.
[36] C. Campos, R. Elvira, J. J. G. Rodr´ıguez, J. M. Montiel, and J. D.
Tard´os, “Orb-slam3: An accurate open-source library for visual, visual–
inertial, and multimap slam,” IEEE Transactions on Robotics, vol. 37,
no. 6, pp. 1874–1890, 2021.
This preprint research paper has not been peer reviewed. Electronic copy available at: https://ssrn.com/abstract=4514612
Preprint not peer reviewed
